"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785782Z", 
"abstract": "Equilibrium climate sensitivity, the global surface temperature response to CO2 doubling, has been persistently uncertain. Recent consensus places it likely within 1.5-4.5 K. Global climate models GCMs, which attempt to represent all relevant physical processes, provide the most direct means of estimating climate sensitivity via CO2
quadrupling experiments. Here we show that the closely related effective climate sensitivity has increased substantially in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 6 CMIP6, with values spanning 1.8-5.6 K across 27 GCMs and exceeding 4.5 K in 10 of them. This statistically insignificant increase is primarily due to stronger positive cloud feedbacks from decreasing extratropical low cloud coverage and albedo. Both of these are tied to the physical representation of clouds which in CMIP6 models lead to weaker responses of extratropical low cloud cover and water content to unforced variations in surface temperature. Establishing the plausibility of these higher sensitivity models is imperative given their implied societal ramifications.", "title": "Causes of Higher Climate Sensitivity in CMIP6 Models"
"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787978B"
"abstract": "Spaceborne NO2 column observations from two high-resolution instruments, Tropospheric Monitoring Instrument TROPOMI on board Sentinel-5 Precursor and Ozone Monitoring Instrument OMI on Aura, reveal unprecedented NO2 decreases over China, South Korea, western Europe, and the United States as a result of public health measures enforced to contain the coronavirus disease outbreak Covid-19 in January-April 2020. The average NO2 column drop over all Chinese cities amounts to -40% relative to the same period in 2019 and reaches up to a factor of ~2 at heavily hit cities, for example, Wuhan, Jinan, while the decreases in western Europe and the United States are also significant -20% to -38%. In contrast with this, although Iran is also strongly affected by the disease, the observations do not show evidence of lower emissions, reflecting more limited health measures.", "title": "Impact of Coronavirus Outbreak on NO2 Pollution Assessed Using TROPOMI and OMI Observations"}, 
{"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788070S", "abstract": "During the COVID-19 outbreak that took place in early 2020, the economic activities in China were drastically reduced and accompanied by a strong reduction in the emission of primary air pollutants. On the basis of measurements made at the monitoring stations operated by the China National Environmental Monitoring Center, we quantify the reduction in surface PM<SUB>2.5</SUB>, NO<SUB>2</SUB>, CO, and SO<SUB>2</SUB> concentrations in northern China during the lockdown, which started on 23 January 2020. We find that, on the average, the levels of surface PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> and NO<SUB>2</SUB> have decreased by approximately 35% and 60%, respectively, between the period 1 and 22 January 2020 and the period 23 January and 29 February 2020. At the same time, the mean ozone concentration has increased by a factor 1.5-2. In urban area of Wuhan, where drastic measures were adopted to limit the spread of the coronavirus, similar changes in the concentrations of PM<SUB>2.5</SUB>, NO<SUB>2</SUB>, and ozone are found.", "title": "The Response in Air Quality to the Reduction of Chinese Economic Activities During the COVID-19 Outbreak"}, {"bibcode": "2020LRSP...17....2P", "abstract": "A review of solar cycle prediction methods and their performance is given, including early forecasts for Cycle 25. The review focuses on those aspects of the solar cycle prediction problem that have a bearing on dynamo theory. The scope of the review is further restricted to the issue of predicting the amplitude and optionally the epoch of an upcoming solar maximum no later than right after the start of the given cycle. Prediction methods form three main groups. Precursor methods rely on the value of some measure of solar activity or magnetism at a specified time to predict the amplitude of the following solar maximum. The choice of a good precursor often implies considerable physical insight: indeed, it has become increasingly clear that the transition from purely empirical precursors to model-based methods is continuous. Model-based approaches can be further divided into two groups: predictions based on surface flux transport models and on consistent dynamo models. The implicit assumption of precursor methods is that each numbered solar cycle is a consistent unit in itself, while solar activity seems to consist of a series of much less tightly intercorrelated individual cycles. Extrapolation methods, in contrast, are based on the premise that the physical process giving rise to the sunspot number record is statistically homogeneous, i.e., the mathematical regularities underlying its variations are the same at any point of time, and therefore it lends itself to analysis and forecasting by time series methods. In their overall performance during the course of the last few solar cycles, precursor methods have clearly been superior to extrapolation methods. One method that has yielded predictions consistently in the right range during the past few solar cycles is the polar field precursor. Nevertheless, some extrapolation methods may still be worth further study. Model based forecasts are quickly coming into their own, and, despite not having a long proven record, their predictions are received with increasing confidence by the community.", "title": "Solar cycle prediction"}, {"bibcode": "2020Ap&SS.365..118K", "abstract": "The Widefield ASKAP L-band Legacy All-sky Blind surveY WALLABY is a next-generation survey of neutral hydrogen HI in the Local Universe. It uses the widefield, high-resolution capability of the Australian Square Kilometer Array Pathfinder ASKAP, a radio interferometer consisting of 36 \u00d712 -m dishes equipped with Phased-Array Feeds PAFs, located in an extremely radio-quiet zone in Western Australia. WALLABY aims to survey three-quarters of the sky -90<SUP>\u2218</SUP>&lt;\u03b4 &lt;+30<SUP>\u2218</SUP> to a redshift of z \u22720.26 , and generate spectral line image cubes at \u02dc30 arcsec resolution and \u02dc1.6 mJy beam<SUP>-1</SUP> per 4 km s<SUP>-1</SUP> channel sensitivity. ASKAPs instantaneous field of view at 1.4 GHz, delivered by the PAFs 36 beams, is about 30 sq deg. At an integrated signal-to-noise ratio of five, WALLABY is expected to detect around half a million galaxies with a mean redshift of z \u02dc0.05 \u02dc200 Mpc. The scientific goals of WALLABY include: a a census of gas-rich galaxies in the vicinity of the Local Group; b a study of the HI properties of galaxies, groups and clusters, in particular the influence of the environment on galaxy evolution; and c the refinement of cosmological parameters using the spatial and redshift distribution of low-bias gas-rich galaxies. For context we provide an overview of recent and planned large-scale HI surveys. Combined with existing and new multi-wavelength sky surveys, WALLABY will enable an exciting new generation of panchromatic studies of the Local Universe. \u2014 First results from the WALLABY pilot survey are revealed, with initial data products publicly available in the CSIRO ASKAP Science Data Archive CASDA.", "title": "WALLABY - an SKA Pathfinder HI survey"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788306L", "abstract": "Since June, 2018, the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment Follow-On GRACE-FO is extending the 15-year monthly mass change record of the GRACE mission, which ended in June 2017. The GRACE-FO instrument and flight system performance has improved over GRACE. Better attitude solutions and enhanced pointing performance result in reduced fuel consumption and gravity range rate post-fit residuals. One accelerometer requires additional calibrations due to unexpected measurement noise. The GRACE-FO gravity and mass change fields from June 2018 through December 2019 continue the GRACE record at an equivalent precision and spatiotemporal sampling. During this period, GRACE-FO observed large interannual terrestrial water variations associated with excess rainfall Central US, Middle East, drought Europe, Australia, and ice melt Greenland. These observations are consistent with independent mass change estimates, providing high confidence that no intermission biases exist from GRACE to GRACE-FO, despite the 11-month gap. GRACE-FO has also successfully demonstrated satellite-to-satellite laser ranging interferometry.", "title": "Extending the Global Mass Change Data Record: GRACE Follow-On Instrument and Science Data Performance"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12530923D", "abstract": "The stratosphere can have a significant impact on winter surface weather on subseasonal to seasonal S2S timescales. This study evaluates the ability of current operational S2S prediction systems to capture two important links between the stratosphere and troposphere: 1 changes in probabilistic prediction skill in the extratropical stratosphere by precursors in the tropics and the extratropical troposphere and 2 changes in surface predictability in the extratropics after stratospheric weak and strong vortex events. Probabilistic skill exists for stratospheric events when including extratropical tropospheric precursors over the North Pacific and Eurasia, though only a limited set of models captures the Eurasian precursors. Tropical teleconnections such as the Madden-Julian Oscillation, the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation, and El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation increase the probabilistic skill of the polar vortex strength, though these are only captured by a limited set of models. At the surface, predictability is increased over the United States, Russia, and the Middle East for weak vortex events, but not for Europe, and the change in predictability is smaller for strong vortex events for all prediction systems. Prediction systems with poorly resolved stratospheric processes represent this skill to a lesser degree. Altogether, the analyses indicate that correctly simulating stratospheric variability and stratosphere-troposphere dynamical coupling are critical elements for skillful S2S wintertime predictions.", "title": "The Role of the Stratosphere in Subseasonal to Seasonal Prediction: 2. Predictability Arising From Stratosphere-Troposphere Coupling"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786749C", "abstract": "We examine CMIP6 simulations of Arctic sea-ice area and volume. We find that CMIP6 models produce a wide spread of mean Arctic sea-ice area, capturing the observational estimate within the multimodel ensemble spread. The CMIP6 multimodel ensemble mean provides a more realistic estimate of the sensitivity of September Arctic sea-ice area to a given amount of anthropogenic CO<SUB>2</SUB> emissions and to a given amount of global warming, compared with earlier CMIP experiments. Still, most CMIP6 models fail to simulate at the same time a plausible evolution of sea-ice area and of global mean surface temperature. In the vast majority of the available CMIP6 simulations, the Arctic Ocean becomes practically sea-ice free sea-ice area &lt;1 \u00d7 10<SUP>6</SUP> km<SUP>2</SUP> in September for the first time before the Year 2050 in each of the four emission scenarios SSP1-1.9, SSP1-2.6, SSP2-4.5, and SSP5-8.5 examined here.", "title": "Arctic Sea Ice in CMIP6"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRB..12518774W", "abstract": "We process rigorously GPS data observed during the past 25 years from continental China to derive site secular velocities. Analysis of the velocity solution leads to the following results. a The deformation field inside the Tibetan plateau and Tien Shan is predominantly continuous, and large deformation gradients only exist perpendicular to the Indo-Eurasian relative plate motion and are associated with a few large strike-slip faults. b Lateral extrusions occur on both the east and west sides of the plateau. The westward extrusion peaks at ~6 mm/yr in the Pamir-Hindu Kush region. A bell-shaped eastward extrusion involves most of the plateau at a maximum rate of ~20 mm/yr between the Jiali and Ganzi-Yushu faults, and the pattern is consistent with gravitational flow in southern and southeastern Tibet where the crust shows widespread dilatation at 10-20 nanostrain/yr. c The southeast borderland of Tibet rotates clockwise around the eastern Himalaya syntaxis, with sinistral and dextral shear motions along faults at the outer and inner flanks of the rotation terrane. The result suggests gravitational flow accomplished through rotation and translation of smaller subblocks in the upper crust. d Outside of the Tibetan plateau and Tien Shan, deformation field is block-like. However, unnegligible internal deformation on the order of a couple of nanostrain/yr is found for all blocks. The North China block, under a unique tectonic loading environment, deforms and rotates at rates significantly higher than its northern and southern neighboring blocks, attesting its higher seismicity rate and earthquake hazard potential than its neighbors.", "title": "Present-Day Crustal Deformation of Continental China Derived From GPS and Its Tectonic Implications"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506111M", "abstract": "We have reconstructed longitude-latitude maps of column dust optical depth CDOD for Martian year MY 34 5 May 2017- 23 March 2019, using observations by the Mars Climate Sounder MCS aboard NASAs Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter spacecraft. Our methodology works by gridding a combination of standard v5.2 and novel v5.3.2 estimates of CDOD from MCS limb observations, using an improved \"Iterative Weighted Binning.\" In this work, we have produced four gridded CDOD maps per sol, at different Mars Universal Times. Together with the seasonal and daily variability, the use of several maps per sol also allows us to explore the diurnal variability of CDOD in the MCS dataset, which is shown to be particularly strong during the MY 34 equinoctial global dust event GDE. In order to understand whether the diurnal variability of CDOD has a physical explanation, and examine the impact of the MY 34 GDE on some aspects of the atmospheric circulation, we have carried out numerical simulations with the \"Laboratoire de M\u00e9t\u00e9orologie Dynamique\" Mars Global Climate Model. We show that the model is able to account for at least part of the observed CDOD diurnal variability. This is particularly true in the southern hemisphere where a strong diurnal wave at the time of the GDE is able to displace dust horizontally as well as vertically. The simulations also clearly show the impact of the MY 34 GDE on the mean meridional circulation and the super-rotating equatorial jet, similarly to the effects of the equinoctial GDE in MY 25.", "title": "Martian Year 34 Column Dust Climatology from Mars Climate Sounder Observations: Reconstructed Maps and Model Simulations"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506111M", "abstract": "We have reconstructed longitude-latitude maps of column dust optical depth CDOD for Martian year MY 34 5 May 2017- 23 March 2019, using observations by the Mars Climate Sounder MCS aboard NASAs Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter spacecraft. Our methodology works by gridding a combination of standard v5.2 and novel v5.3.2 estimates of CDOD from MCS limb observations, using an improved \"Iterative Weighted Binning.\" In this work, we have produced four gridded CDOD maps per sol, at different Mars Universal Times. Together with the seasonal and daily variability, the use of several maps per sol also allows us to explore the diurnal variability of CDOD in the MCS dataset, which is shown to be particularly strong during the MY 34 equinoctial global dust event GDE. In order to understand whether the diurnal variability of CDOD has a physical explanation, and examine the impact of the MY 34 GDE on some aspects of the atmospheric circulation, we have carried out numerical simulations with the \"Laboratoire de M\u00e9t\u00e9orologie Dynamique\" Mars Global Climate Model. We show that the model is able to account for at least part of the observed CDOD diurnal variability. This is particularly true in the southern hemisphere where a strong diurnal wave at the time of the GDE is able to displace dust horizontally as well as vertically. The simulations also clearly show the impact of the MY 34 GDE on the mean meridional circulation and the super-rotating equatorial jet, similarly to the effects of the equinoctial GDE in MY 25.", "title": "Martian Year 34 Column Dust Climatology from Mars Climate Sounder Observations: Reconstructed Maps and Model Simulations"}, {"bibcode": "2020LRSP...17....4C", "abstract": "This paper reviews recent advances and current debates in modeling the solar cycle as a hydromagnetic dynamo process. Emphasis is placed on relatively simple dynamo models that are nonetheless detailed enough to be comparable to solar cycle observations. After a brief overview of the dynamo problem and of key observational constraints, I begin by reviewing the various magnetic field regeneration mechanisms that have been proposed in the solar context. I move on to a presentation and critical discussion of extant solar cycle models based on these mechanisms, followed by a discussion of recent magnetohydrodynamical simulations of solar convection generating solar-like large-scale magnetic cycles. I then turn to the origin and consequences of fluctuations in these models and simulations, including amplitude and parity modulation, chaotic behavior, and intermittency. The paper concludes with a discussion of our current state of ignorance regarding various key questions relating to the explanatory framework offered by dynamo models of the solar cycle.", "title": "Dynamo models of the solar cycle"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...50C", "abstract": "Giant molecular clouds GMCs and their stellar offspring are the building blocks of galaxies. The physical characteristics of GMCs and their evolution are tightly connected to galaxy evolution. The macroscopic properties of the interstellar medium propagate into the properties of GMCs condensing out of it, with correlations between e.g. the galactic and GMC scale gas pressures, surface densities and volume densities. That way, the galactic environment sets the initial conditions for star formation within GMCs. After the onset of massive star formation, stellar feedback from e.g. photoionisation, stellar winds, and supernovae eventually contributes to dispersing the parent cloud, depositing energy, momentum and metals into the surrounding medium, thereby changing the properties of galaxies. This cycling of matter between gas and stars, governed by star formation and feedback, is therefore a major driver of galaxy evolution. Much of the recent debate has focused on the durations of the various evolutionary phases that constitute this cycle in galaxies, and what these can teach us about the physical mechanisms driving the cycle. We review results from observational, theoretical, and numerical work to build a dynamical picture of the evolutionary lifecycle of GMC evolution, star formation, and feedback in galaxies.", "title": "The Molecular Cloud Lifecycle"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788533C", "abstract": "It is a puzzle as to why more severe haze formed during the New Year Holiday in 2020 NYH-20, when China was in an unprecedented state of shutdown to contain the coronavirus COVID-19 outbreak, than in 2019 NYH-19. We performed a comprehensive measurement and modeling analysis of the aerosol chemistry and physics at multiple sites in China mainly in Shanghai before, during, and after NYH-19 and NYH-20. Much higher secondary aerosol fraction in PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> were observed during NYH-20 73% than during NYH-19 59%. During NYH-20, PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> levels correlated significantly with the oxidation ratio of nitrogen r<SUP>2</SUP> = 0.77, p &lt; 0.01, and aged particles from northern China were found to impede atmospheric new particle formation and growth in Shanghai. A markedly enhanced efficiency of nitrate aerosol formation was observed along the transport pathways during NYH-20, despite the overall low atmospheric NO<SUB>2</SUB> levels.", "title": "Puzzling Haze Events in China During the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Shutdown"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4783898R", "abstract": "The methods to quantify equilibrium climate sensitivity are still debated. We collect millennial-length simulations of coupled climate models and show that the global mean equilibrium warming is higher than those obtained using extrapolation methods from shorter simulations. Specifically, 27 simulations with 15 climate models forced with a range of CO<SUB>2</SUB> concentrations show a median 17% larger equilibrium warming than estimated from the first 150 years of the simulations. The spatial patterns of radiative feedbacks change continuously, in most regions reducing their tendency to stabilizing the climate. In the equatorial Pacific, however, feedbacks become more stabilizing with time. The global feedback evolution is initially dominated by the tropics, with eventual substantial contributions from the mid-latitudes. Time-dependent feedbacks underscore the need of a measure of climate sensitivity that accounts for the degree of equilibration, so that models, observations, and paleo proxies can be adequately compared and aggregated to estimate future warming.", "title": "Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity Estimated by Equilibrating Climate Models"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...69A", "abstract": "Star clusters are fundamental units of stellar feedback and unique tracers of their host galactic properties. In this review, we will first focus on their constituents, i.e. detailed insight into their stellar populations and their surrounding ionised, warm, neutral, and molecular gas. We, then, move beyond the Local Group to review star cluster populations at various evolutionary stages, and in diverse galactic environmental conditions accessible in the local Universe. At high redshift, where conditions for cluster formation and evolution are more extreme, we are only able to observe the integrated light of a handful of objects that we believe will become globular clusters. We therefore discuss how numerical and analytical methods, informed by the observed properties of cluster populations in the local Universe, are used to develop sophisticated simulations potentially capable of disentangling the genetic map of galaxy formation and assembly that is carried by globular cluster populations.", "title": "Star Clusters Near and Far; Tracing Star Formation Across Cosmic Time"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..66.1004H", "abstract": "I review the basics of the disc instability model DIM for dwarf novae and soft-X-ray transients and its most recent developments, as well as the current limitations of the model, focusing on the dwarf nova case. Although the DIM uses the Shakura-Sunyaev prescription for angular momentum transport, which we know now to be at best inaccurate, it is surprisingly efficient in reproducing the outbursts of dwarf novae and soft X-ray transients, provided that some ingredients, such as irradiation of the accretion disc and of the donor star, mass transfer variations, truncation of the inner disc, etc., are added to the basic model. As recently realized, taking into account the existence of winds and outflows and of the torque they exert on the accretion disc may significantly impact the model. I also discuss the origin of the superoutbursts that are probably due to a combination of variations of the mass transfer rate and of a tidal instability. I finally mention a number of unsolved problems and caveats, among which the most embarrassing one is the modelling of the low state. Despite significant progresses in the past few years both on our understanding of angular momentum transport, the DIM is still needed for understanding transient systems.", "title": "A review of the disc instability model for dwarf novae, soft X-ray transients and related objects"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..65..821F", "abstract": "Very long baseline interferometry VLBI from the ground at millimeter wavelengths can resolve the black hole shadow around two supermassive black holes, Sagittarius A<SUP>\u2217</SUP> and M87. The addition of modest telescopes in space would allow the combined array to produce higher-resolution, higher-fidelity images of these and other sources. This paper explores the potential benefits of adding orbital elements to the Event Horizon Telescope. We reconstruct model images using simulated data from arrays including telescopes in different orbits. We find that an array including one telescope near geostationary orbit and one in a high-inclination medium Earth of geosynchronous orbit can successfully produce high-fidelity images capable of resolving shadows as small as 3 \u03bc as in diameter. One such key source, the Sombrero Galaxy, may be important to address questions regarding why some black holes launch powerful jets while others do not. Meanwhile, higher-resolution imaging of the substructure of M87 may clarify how jets are launched in the first place. The extra resolution provided by space VLBI will also improve studies of the collimation of jets from active galactic nuclei.", "title": "Imaging black holes and jets with a VLBI array including multiple space-based telescopes"}, {"bibcode": "2020SoPh..295..172R", "abstract": "We present an overview of the National Science Foundations Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope DKIST, its instruments, and support facilities. The 4 m aperture DKIST provides the highest-resolution observations of the Sun ever achieved. The large aperture of DKIST combined with state-of-the-art instrumentation provide the sensitivity to measure the vector magnetic field in the chromosphere and in the faint corona, i.e. for the first time with DKIST we will be able to measure and study the most important free-energy source in the outer solar atmosphere - the coronal magnetic field. Over its operational lifetime DKIST will advance our knowledge of fundamental astronomical processes, including highly dynamic solar eruptions that are at the source of space-weather events that impact our technological society. Design and construction of DKIST took over two decades. DKIST implements a fast f/2, off-axis Gregorian optical design. The maximum available field-of-view is 5 arcmin. A complex thermal-control system was implemented in order to remove at prime focus the majority of the 13 kW collected by the primary mirror and to keep optical surfaces and structures at ambient temperature, thus avoiding self-induced local seeing. A high-order adaptive-optics system with 1600 actuators corrects atmospheric seeing enabling diffraction limited imaging and spectroscopy. Five instruments, four of which are polarimeters, provide powerful diagnostic capability over a broad wavelength range covering the visible, near-infrared, and mid-infrared spectrum. New polarization-calibration strategies were developed to achieve the stringent polarization accuracy requirement of 5\u00d710<SUP>-4</SUP>. Instruments can be combined and operated simultaneously in order to obtain a maximum of observational information. Observing time on DKIST is allocated through an open, merit-based proposal process. DKIST will be operated primarily in \"service mode\" and is expected to on average produce 3 PB of raw data per year. A newly developed data center located at the NSO Headquarters in Boulder will initially serve fully calibrated data to the international users community. Higher-level data products, such as physical parameters obtained from inversions of spectro-polarimetric data will be added as resources allow.", "title": "The Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope - Observatory Overview"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4784288Y", "abstract": "Heavy PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter equal to or less than 2.5 \u03bcm pollution and urban heat island UHI pose increasing threats to human health and living environment in populated cities. However, how PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> pollution affects the UHI intensity UHII has not been fully understood. The impacts of PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> on the wintertime UHII in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei megalopolis of China are explored during 2013-2017. The results show that the UHII at the time of daily maximum/minimum temperature UHII<SUB>max</SUB>/UHII<SUB>min</SUB> exhibits a decreasing/increasing tendency as PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> concentration increases, causing a continuous decrease in the diurnal temperature range. These effects are mediated via aerosol-radiation interaction aerosol-cloud interaction under clear-sky cloudy condition. The changes in PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> concentration further cause different relative trends of UHII<SUB>max</SUB>/UHII<SUB>min</SUB>/diurnal temperature range across different cities in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, which are likely related to the differences in both the PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> composition and city size. This study provides insights on how air pollution affects urban climate and would help to design effective mitigation strategies.", "title": "PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> Pollution Modulates Wintertime Urban Heat Island Intensity in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Megalopolis, China"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12530920D", "abstract": "The stratosphere has been identified as an important source of predictability for a range of processes on subseasonal to seasonal S2S time scales. Knowledge about S2S predictability within the stratosphere is however still limited. This study evaluates to what extent predictability in the extratropical stratosphere exists in hindcasts of operational prediction systems in the S2S database. The stratosphere is found to exhibit extended predictability as compared to the troposphere. Prediction systems with higher stratospheric skill tend to also exhibit higher skill in the troposphere. The analysis also includes an assessment of the predictability for stratospheric events, including early and midwinter sudden stratospheric warming events, strong vortex events, and extreme heat flux events for the Northern Hemisphere and final warming events for both hemispheres. Strong vortex events and final warming events exhibit higher levels of predictability as compared to sudden stratospheric warming events. In general, skill is limited to the deterministic range of 1 to 2 weeks. High-top prediction systems overall exhibit higher stratospheric prediction skill as compared to their low-top counterparts, pointing to the important role of stratospheric representation in S2S prediction models.", "title": "The Role of the Stratosphere in Subseasonal to Seasonal Prediction: 1. Predictability of the Stratosphere"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786577Y", "abstract": "An exceptionally strong stationary planetary wave with Zonal Wavenumber 1 led to a sudden stratospheric warming SSW in the Southern Hemisphere in September 2019. Ionospheric data from European Space Agencys Swarm satellite constellation mission show prominent 6-day variations in the dayside low-latitude region at this time, which can be attributed to forcing from the middle atmosphere by the Rossby normal mode \"quasi-6-day wave\" Q6DW. Geopotential height measurements by the Microwave Limb Sounder aboard National Aeronautics and Space Administrations Aura satellite reveal a burst of global Q6DW activity in the mesosphere and lower thermosphere during the SSW, which is one of the strongest in the record. The Q6DW is apparently generated in the polar stratosphere at 30-40 km, where the atmosphere is unstable due to strong vertical wind shear connected with planetary wave breaking. These results suggest that an Antarctic SSW can lead to ionospheric variability through wave forcing from the middle atmosphere.", "title": "September 2019 Antarctic Sudden Stratospheric Warming: Quasi-6-Day Wave Burst and Ionospheric Effects"}, {"bibcode": "2020LRCA....6....3M", "abstract": "Multi-dimensional fluid flow plays a paramount role in the explosions of massive stars as core-collapse supernovae. In recent years, three-dimensional 3D simulations of these phenomena have matured significantly. Considerable progress has been made towards identifying the ingredients for shock revival by the neutrino-driven mechanism, and successful explosions have already been obtained in a number of self-consistent 3D models. These advances also bring new challenges, however. Prompted by a need for increased physical realism and meaningful model validation, supernova theory is now moving towards a more integrated view that connects multi-dimensional phenomena in the late convective burning stages prior to collapse, the explosion engine, and mixing instabilities in the supernova envelope. Here we review our current understanding of multi-D fluid flow in core-collapse supernovae and their progenitors. We start by outlining specific challenges faced by hydrodynamic simulations of core-collapse supernovae and of the late convective burning stages. We then discuss recent advances and open questions in theory and simulations.", "title": "Hydrodynamics of core-collapse supernovae and their progenitors"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...38H", "abstract": "There are still many open questions regarding the nature of Uranus and Neptune, the outermost planets in the Solar System. In this review we summarize the current-knowledge about Uranus and Neptune with a focus on their composition and internal structure, formation including potential subsequent giant impacts, and thermal evolution. We present key open questions and discuss the uncertainty in the internal structures of the planets due to the possibility of non-adiabatic and inhomogeneous interiors. We also provide the reasoning for improved observational constraints on their fundamental physical parameters such as their gravitational and magnetic fields, rotation rates, and deep atmospheric composition and temperature. Only this way will we be able to improve our understating of these planetary objects, and the many similar-sized objects orbiting other stars.", "title": "Uranus and Neptune: Origin, Evolution and Internal Structure"}, {"bibcode": "2020LRSP...17....1A", "abstract": "Sunspot observations are available in fairly good numbers since 1610, after the invention of the telescope. This review is concerned with those sunspot observations of which longer records and drawings in particular are available. Those records bear information beyond the classical sunspot numbers or group sunspot numbers. We begin with a brief summary on naked-eye sunspot observations, in particular those with drawings. They are followed by the records of drawings from 1610 to about 1900. The review is not a compilation of all known historical sunspot information. Some records contributing substantially to the sunspot number time series may therefore be absent. We also glance at the evolution of the understanding of what sunspots actually are, from 1610 to the 19th century. The final part of the review illuminates the physical quantities that can be derived from historical drawings.", "title": "Historical sunspot records"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4789269G", "abstract": "TROPOMI satellite data show substantial drops in nitrogen dioxide NO<SUB>2</SUB> during COVID-19 physical distancing. To attribute NO<SUB>2</SUB> changes to NO<SUB>x</SUB> emissions changes over short timescales, one must account for meteorology. We find that meteorological patterns were especially favorable for low NO<SUB>2</SUB> in much of the United States in spring 2020, complicating comparisons with spring 2019. Meteorological variations between years can cause column NO<SUB>2</SUB> differences of ~15% over monthly timescales. After accounting for solar angle and meteorological considerations, we calculate that NO<SUB>2</SUB> drops ranged between 9.2% and 43.4% among 20 cities in North America, with a median of 21.6%. Of the studied cities, largest NO<SUB>2</SUB> drops &gt;30% were in San Jose, Los Angeles, and Toronto, and smallest drops &lt;12% were in Miami, Minneapolis, and Dallas. These normalized NO<SUB>2</SUB> changes can be used to highlight locations with greater activity changes and better understand the sources contributing to adverse air quality in each city.", "title": "Disentangling the Impact of the COVID-19 Lockdowns on Urban NO<SUB>2</SUB> From Natural Variability"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...29P", "abstract": "In recent years, exciting developments have taken place in the identification of the role of cosmic rays in star-forming environments. Observations from radio to infrared wavelengths and theoretical modelling have shown that low-energy cosmic rays &lt;1 TeV play a fundamental role in shaping the chemical richness of the interstellar medium, determining the dynamical evolution of molecular clouds. In this review we summarise in a coherent picture the main results obtained by observations and by theoretical models of propagation and generation of cosmic rays, from the smallest scales of protostars and circumstellar discs, to young stellar clusters, up to Galactic and extragalactic scales. We also discuss the new fields that will be explored in the near future thanks to new generation instruments, such as: CTA, for the \u03b3 -ray emission from high-mass protostars; SKA and precursors, for the synchrotron emission at different scales; and ELT/HIRES, JWST, and ARIEL, for the impact of cosmic rays on exoplanetary atmospheres and habitability.", "title": "Impact of Low-Energy Cosmic Rays on Star Formation"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...18A", "abstract": "Core accretion is the conventional model for the formation of the gas giant planets. The model may also apply to the icy giant planets, Uranus and Neptune, except that it may take upward of 50 Myr for them to form at their present orbital distances, which is beyond the maximum 5 Myr lifetime of the solar nebula. A plausible alternative is formation in the region of the gas giants, followed by migration to their present locations at 20 and 30 AU. Another alternative is the gravitational instability model, which is much faster and does not require the formation of a core first. In either scenario, heavy elements mass &gt; helium provide the critical observational constraints. Additionally, helium and neon abundances in the observable troposphere are indicators of the interior processes in the megabar region. We investigate the atmospheric regions most suitable for accessing the above elements. Volatiles containing some of the elements C, N, S, O undergo condensation on the icy giants. On the other hand, noble gases He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, which are chemically inert, non-condensible, and uniform all over the planet, can provide the best constraints to the formation and migration models of Uranus and Neptune. Only entry probes are capable of measuring the key elements and isotopic ratios. They are accessible at 5-10 bars, except for the condensibles. Data from an orbiter on gravity, magnetic field, upper atmospheric composition and the maps of ammonia and water with depth would be a valuable complement to the situ measurements.", "title": "Deep Atmosphere Composition, Structure, Origin, and Exploration, with Particular Focus on Critical in situ Science at the Icy Giants"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786382G", "abstract": "The 4 July 2019 M<SUB>w</SUB>6.4 and subsequent 6 July 2019 M<SUB>w</SUB>7.1 Ridgecrest sequence earthquakes CA, USA ruptured orthogonal fault planes in a low slip rate 1 mm/year dextral fault zone in the area linking the Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane. This region accommodates nearly one fourth of plate boundary motion and has been proposed to be an incipient transform fault system that could eventually become the main tectonic boundary, replacing the San Andreas Fault. We investigate the rupture process of these events using a novel simultaneous kinematic slip method with joint inversion of high-rate GNSS, strong motion, GNSS static offset, and Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar data. We model the Coulomb stress change to evaluate how the M<SUB>w</SUB>6.4 earthquake may have affected the subsequent M<SUB>w</SUB>7.1 event. Our findings suggest complex interactions between several fault structures, including dynamic and static triggering, and provide important context for regional seismic source characterization and hazard models.", "title": "Complex Rupture of an Immature Fault Zone: A Simultaneous Kinematic Model of the 2019 Ridgecrest, CA Earthquakes"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4789063M", "abstract": "Aura Microwave Limb Sounder MLS measurements show that chemical processing was critical to the observed record-low Arctic stratospheric ozone in spring 2020. The 16-year MLS record indicates more polar denitrification and dehydration in 2019/2020 than in any Arctic winter except 2015/2016. Chlorine activation and ozone depletion began earlier than in any previously observed winter, with evidence of chemical ozone loss starting in November. Active chlorine then persisted as late into spring as it did in 2011. Empirical estimates suggest maximum chemical ozone losses near 2.8 ppmv by late March in both 2011 and 2020. However, peak chlorine activation, and thus peak ozone loss, occurred at lower altitudes in 2020 than in 2011, leading to the lowest Arctic ozone values ever observed at potential temperature levels from \u223c400-480 K, with similar ozone values to those in 2011 at higher levels.", "title": "Record-Low Arctic Stratospheric Ozone in 2020: MLS Observations of Chemical Processes and Comparisons With Previous Extreme Winters"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785868Y", "abstract": "Recent evidence shows that wind-driven ocean currents, like the western boundary currents, are strongly affected by global warming. However, due to insufficient observations both on temporal and spatial scales, the impact of climate change on large-scale ocean gyres is still not clear. Here, based on satellite observations of sea surface height and sea surface temperature, we find a consistent poleward shift of the major ocean gyres. Due to strong natural variability, most of the observed ocean gyre shifts are not statistically significant, implying that natural variations may contribute to the observed trends. However, climate model simulations forced with increasing greenhouse gases suggest that the observed shift is most likely to be a response of global warming. The displacement of ocean gyres, which is coupled with the poleward shift of extratropical atmospheric circulation, has broad impacts on ocean heat transport, regional sea level rise, and coastal ocean circulation.", "title": "Poleward Shift of the Major Ocean Gyres Detected in a Warming Climate"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787291V", "abstract": "We examine data continuity between the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment GRACE and GRACE Follow-On FO missions over Greenland and Antarctica using independent data from the mass budget method, which calculates the difference between ice sheet surface mass balance and ice discharge at the periphery. For both ice sheets, we find consistent GRACE/GRACE-FO time series across the data gap, at the continental and regional scales, and the data gap is confidently filled with mass budget method data. In Greenland, the GRACE-FO data reveal an exceptional summer loss of 600 Gt in 2019 following two cold summers. In Antarctica, ongoing high mass losses in the Amundsen Sea Embayment of West Antarctica, the Antarctic Peninsula, and Wilkes Land in East Antarctica cumulate to 2130, 560, and 370 Gt, respectively, since 2002. A cumulative mass gain of 980 Gt in Queen Maud Land since 2009, however, led to a pause in the acceleration in mass loss from Antarctica after 2016.", "title": "Continuity of Ice Sheet Mass Loss in Greenland and Antarctica From the GRACE and GRACE Follow-On Missions"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..66.1209D", "abstract": "Among hard X-ray Galactic sources detected with the Swift and INTEGRAL surveys, those discovered as accreting white dwarf binaries have surprisingly boosted in number in the recent years. The majority are identified as magnetic Cataclysmic Variables of the Intermediate Polar type, suggesting this subclass as an important constituent of the Galactic population of X-ray sources. We here review and discuss the X-ray emission properties of newly discovered sources in the framework of an identification programme with the XMM-Newton satellite that increased the sample of this subclass by a factor of two.", "title": "Hard X-ray cataclysmic variables"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...35S", "abstract": "Tidal disruption events occur rarely in any individual galaxy. Over the last decade, however, time-domain surveys have begun to accumulate statistical samples of these flares. What dynamical processes are responsible for feeding stars to supermassive black holes? At what rate are stars tidally disrupted in realistic galactic nuclei? What may we learn about supermassive black holes and broader astrophysical questions by estimating tidal disruption event rates from observational samples of flares? These are the questions we aim to address in this Chapter, which summarizes current theoretical knowledge about rates of stellar tidal disruption, and compares theoretical predictions to the current state of observations.", "title": "Rates of Stellar Tidal Disruption"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527084S", "abstract": "Our knowledge of the properties of coronal mass ejections CMEs in the inner heliosphere is constrained by the relative lack of plasma observations between the Sun and 1 AU. In this work, we present a comprehensive catalog of 47 CMEs measured in situ measurements by two or more radially aligned spacecraft MESSENGER, Venus Express, STEREO, Wind/ACE. We estimate the CME impact speeds at Mercury and Venus using a drag-based model and present an average propagation profile of CMEs speed and deceleration/acceleration in the inner heliosphere. We find that CME deceleration continues past Mercurys orbit but most of the deceleration occurs between the Sun and Mercury. We examine the exponential decrease of the maximum magnetic field strength in the CME with heliocentric distance using two approaches: a modified statistical method and analysis from individual conjunction events. Findings from both the approaches are on average consistent with previous studies but show significant event-to-event variability. We also find the expansion of the CME sheath to be well fit by a linear function. However, we observe the average sheath duration and its increase to be fairly independent of the initial CME speed, contradicting commonly held knowledge that slower CMEs drive larger sheaths. We also present an analysis of the 3 November 2011 CME observed in longitudinal conjunction between MESSENGER, Venus Express, and STEREO-B focusing on the expansion of the CME and its correlation with the exponential falloff of the maximum magnetic field strength in the ejecta.", "title": "Radial Evolution of Coronal Mass Ejections Between MESSENGER, Venus Express, STEREO, and L1: Catalog and Analysis"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527084S", "abstract": "Our knowledge of the properties of coronal mass ejections CMEs in the inner heliosphere is constrained by the relative lack of plasma observations between the Sun and 1 AU. In this work, we present a comprehensive catalog of 47 CMEs measured in situ measurements by two or more radially aligned spacecraft MESSENGER, Venus Express, STEREO, Wind/ACE. We estimate the CME impact speeds at Mercury and Venus using a drag-based model and present an average propagation profile of CMEs speed and deceleration/acceleration in the inner heliosphere. We find that CME deceleration continues past Mercurys orbit but most of the deceleration occurs between the Sun and Mercury. We examine the exponential decrease of the maximum magnetic field strength in the CME with heliocentric distance using two approaches: a modified statistical method and analysis from individual conjunction events. Findings from both the approaches are on average consistent with previous studies but show significant event-to-event variability. We also find the expansion of the CME sheath to be well fit by a linear function. However, we observe the average sheath duration and its increase to be fairly independent of the initial CME speed, contradicting commonly held knowledge that slower CMEs drive larger sheaths. We also present an analysis of the 3 November 2011 CME observed in longitudinal conjunction between MESSENGER, Venus Express, and STEREO-B focusing on the expansion of the CME and its correlation with the exponential falloff of the maximum magnetic field strength in the ejecta.", "title": "Radial Evolution of Coronal Mass Ejections Between MESSENGER, Venus Express, STEREO, and L1: Catalog and Analysis"}, {"bibcode": "2020P&SS..19105030F", "abstract": "Uranus and Neptune, and their diverse satellite and ring systems, represent the least explored environments of our Solar System, and yet may provide the archetype for the most common outcome of planetary formation throughout our galaxy. Ice Giants will be the last remaining class of Solar System planet to have a dedicated orbital explorer, and international efforts are under way to realise such an ambitious mission in the coming decades. In 2019, the European Space Agency released a call for scientific themes for its strategic science planning process for the 2030s and 2040s, known as Voyage 2050. We used this opportunity to review our present-day knowledge of the Uranus and Neptune systems, producing a revised and updated set of scientific questions and motivations for their exploration. This review article describes how such a mission could explore their origins, ice-rich interiors, dynamic atmospheres, unique magnetospheres, and myriad icy satellites, to address questions at the heart of modern planetary science. These two worlds are superb examples of how planets with shared origins can exhibit remarkably different evolutionary paths: Neptune as the archetype for Ice Giants, whereas Uranus may be atypical. Exploring Uranus natural satellites and Neptunes captured moon Triton could reveal how Ocean Worlds form and remain active, redefining the extent of the habitable zone in our Solar System. For these reasons and more, we advocate that an Ice Giant System explorer should become a strategic cornerstone mission within ESAs Voyage 2050 programme, in partnership with international collaborators, and targeting launch opportunities in the early 2030s.", "title": "Ice Giant Systems: The scientific potential of orbital missions to Uranus and Neptune"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...66R", "abstract": "BepiColombo has a larger and in many ways more capable suite of instruments relevant for determination of the topographic, physical, chemical and mineralogical properties of Mercurys surface than the suite carried by NASAs MESSENGER spacecraft. Moreover, BepiColombos data rate is substantially higher. This equips it to confirm, elaborate upon, and go beyond many of MESSENGERs remarkable achievements. Furthermore, the geometry of BepiColombos orbital science campaign, beginning in 2026, will enable it to make uniformly resolved observations of both northern and southern hemispheres. This will offer more detailed and complete imaging and topographic mapping, element mapping with better sensitivity and improved spatial resolution, and totally new mineralogical mapping.", "title": "Rationale for BepiColombo Studies of Mercury's Surface and Composition"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787232T", "abstract": "The double-intertropical convergence zone ITCZ bias is one of the most outstanding errors in all previous generations of climate models. Here, the annual double-ITCZ bias and the associated precipitation bias in the latest climate models for Coupled Model Intercomparison Project CMIP Phase 6 CMIP6 are examined in comparison to their previous generations CMIP Phase 3 [CMIP3] and CMIP Phase 5 [CMIP5]. All three generations of CMIP models share similar systematic annual multi-model ensemble mean precipitation errors in the tropics. The notorious double-ITCZ bias and its big inter-model spread persist in CMIP3, CMIP5, and CMIP6 models. Based on several tropical precipitation bias indices, the double-ITCZ bias is slightly reduced from CMIP3 or CMIP5 to CMIP6. In addition, the annual equatorial Pacific cold tongue persists in all three generations of CMIP models, but its inter-model spread is reduced from CMIP3 to CMIP5 and from CMIP5 to CMIP6.", "title": "The Double-ITCZ Bias in CMIP3, CMIP5, and CMIP6 Models Based on Annual Mean Precipitation"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786713D", "abstract": "A positive Indian Ocean Dipole IOD in 2019 that reached the level of the strongest events occurred in 1994 and 1997 and caused disasters in countries around the Indian Ocean. Using a quasi real-time ensemble seasonal prediction system based on the Scale Interaction Experiment-Frontier climate model, its occurrence was predicted a few seasons ahead and the possible impacts were warned by overcoming the so-called winter predictability barrier. The successful prediction of such a super event at long lead time may contribute to reducing the risks of socioeconomic losses by introducing suitable measures for adaptation. Here, we have investigated possible sources of the successful prediction by analyzing covariability of intermember anomalies defined as deviations from the mean in the ensemble reforecasts. Interestingly, it is found that the potential predictability of the 2019 super positive event is linked with the preexisting El Ni\u00f1o Modoki in the tropical Pacific.", "title": "Predictability of the Super IOD Event in 2019 and Its Link With El Ni\u00f1o Modoki"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4783906G", "abstract": "The El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation ENSO represents the largest source of year-to-year global climate variability. While Earth system models suggest a range of possible shifts in ENSO properties under continued greenhouse gas forcing, many centuries of preindustrial climate data are required to detect a potential shift in the properties of recent ENSO extremes. Here we reconstruct the strength of ENSO variations over the last 7,000 years with a new ensemble of fossil coral oxygen isotope records from the Line Islands, located in the central equatorial Pacific. The corals document a significant decrease in ENSO variance of ~20% from 3,000 to 5,000 years ago, coinciding with changes in spring/fall precessional insolation. We find that ENSO variability over the last five decades is ~25% stronger than during the preindustrial. Our results provide empirical support for recent climate model projections showing an intensification of ENSO extremes under greenhouse forcing.", "title": "Enhanced El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation Variability in Recent Decades"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506306R", "abstract": "Vera Rubin ridge VRR is an erosion-resistant feature on the northwestern slope of Mount Sharp in Gale crater, Mars, and orbital visible/shortwave infrared measurements indicate it contains red hematite. The Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover performed an extensive campaign on VRR to study its mineralogy, geochemistry, and sedimentology to determine the depositional and diagenetic history of the ridge and constrain the processes by which the hematite could have formed. X-ray diffraction XRD data from the CheMin instrument of four samples drilled on and below VRR demonstrate differences in iron, phyllosilicate, and sulfate mineralogy and hematite grain size. Hematite is common across the ridge, and its detection in a gray outcrop suggest localized regions with coarse-grained hematite, which commonly forms from warm fluids. Broad XRD peaks for hematite in one sample below VRR and the abundance of FeO<SUB>T</SUB> in the amorphous component suggest the presence of nanocrystalline hematite and amorphous Fe oxides/oxyhydroxides. Well crystalline akaganeite and jarosite are present in two samples drilled from VRR, indicating at least limited alteration by acid-saline fluids. Collapsed nontronite is present below VRR, but samples from VRR contain phyllosilicate with d001 = 9.6 \u00c5, possibly from ferripyrophyllite or an acid-altered smectite. The most likely cementing agents creating the ridge are hematite and opaline silica. We hypothesize late diagenesis can explain much of the mineralogical variation on the ridge, where multiple fluid episodes with variable pH, salinity, and temperature altered the rocks, causing the precipitation and crystallization of phases that are not otherwise in equilibrium.", "title": "Mineralogy of Vera Rubin Ridge From the Mars Science Laboratory CheMin Instrument"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506306R", "abstract": "Vera Rubin ridge VRR is an erosion-resistant feature on the northwestern slope of Mount Sharp in Gale crater, Mars, and orbital visible/shortwave infrared measurements indicate it contains red hematite. The Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover performed an extensive campaign on VRR to study its mineralogy, geochemistry, and sedimentology to determine the depositional and diagenetic history of the ridge and constrain the processes by which the hematite could have formed. X-ray diffraction XRD data from the CheMin instrument of four samples drilled on and below VRR demonstrate differences in iron, phyllosilicate, and sulfate mineralogy and hematite grain size. Hematite is common across the ridge, and its detection in a gray outcrop suggest localized regions with coarse-grained hematite, which commonly forms from warm fluids. Broad XRD peaks for hematite in one sample below VRR and the abundance of FeO<SUB>T</SUB> in the amorphous component suggest the presence of nanocrystalline hematite and amorphous Fe oxides/oxyhydroxides. Well crystalline akaganeite and jarosite are present in two samples drilled from VRR, indicating at least limited alteration by acid-saline fluids. Collapsed nontronite is present below VRR, but samples from VRR contain phyllosilicate with d001 = 9.6 \u00c5, possibly from ferripyrophyllite or an acid-altered smectite. The most likely cementing agents creating the ridge are hematite and opaline silica. We hypothesize late diagenesis can explain much of the mineralogical variation on the ridge, where multiple fluid episodes with variable pH, salinity, and temperature altered the rocks, causing the precipitation and crystallization of phases that are not otherwise in equilibrium.", "title": "Mineralogy of Vera Rubin Ridge From the Mars Science Laboratory CheMin Instrument"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506307E", "abstract": "For ~500 Martian solar days sols, the Mars Science Laboratory team explored Vera Rubin ridge VRR, a topographic feature on the northwest slope of Aeolis Mons. Here we review the sedimentary facies and stratigraphy observed during sols 1,800-2,300, covering more than 100 m of stratigraphic thickness. Curiositys traverse includes two transects across the ridge, which enables investigation of lateral variability over a distance of ~300 m. Three informally named stratigraphic members of the Murray formation are described: Blunts Point, Pettegrove Point, and Jura, with the latter two exposed on VRR. The Blunts Point member, exposed just below the ridge, is characterized by a recessive, fine-grained facies that exhibits extensive planar lamination and is crosscut by abundant curvi-planar veins. The Pettegrove Point member is more resistant, fine-grained, thinly planar laminated, and contains a higher abundance of diagenetic concretions. Conformable above the Pettegrove Point member is the Jura member, which is also fine-grained and parallel stratified, but is marked by a distinct step in topography, which coincides with localized meter-scale inclined strata, a thinly and thickly laminated facies, and occasional crystal molds. All members record low-energy lacustrine deposition, consistent with prior observations of the Murray formation. Uncommon outcrops of low-angle stratification suggest possible subaqueous currents, and steeply inclined beds may be the result of slumping. Collectively, the rocks exposed at VRR provide additional evidence for a long-lived lacustrine environment in excess of 10<SUP>6</SUP> years via comparison to terrestrial records of sedimentation, which extends our understanding of the duration of habitable conditions in Gale crater.", "title": "A Lacustrine Paleoenvironment Recorded at Vera RubinRidge, Gale Crater: Overview of the Sedimentology and Stratigraphy Observed by the Mars ScienceLaboratory Curiosity Rover"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506307E", "abstract": "For ~500 Martian solar days sols, the Mars Science Laboratory team explored Vera Rubin ridge VRR, a topographic feature on the northwest slope of Aeolis Mons. Here we review the sedimentary facies and stratigraphy observed during sols 1,800-2,300, covering more than 100 m of stratigraphic thickness. Curiositys traverse includes two transects across the ridge, which enables investigation of lateral variability over a distance of ~300 m. Three informally named stratigraphic members of the Murray formation are described: Blunts Point, Pettegrove Point, and Jura, with the latter two exposed on VRR. The Blunts Point member, exposed just below the ridge, is characterized by a recessive, fine-grained facies that exhibits extensive planar lamination and is crosscut by abundant curvi-planar veins. The Pettegrove Point member is more resistant, fine-grained, thinly planar laminated, and contains a higher abundance of diagenetic concretions. Conformable above the Pettegrove Point member is the Jura member, which is also fine-grained and parallel stratified, but is marked by a distinct step in topography, which coincides with localized meter-scale inclined strata, a thinly and thickly laminated facies, and occasional crystal molds. All members record low-energy lacustrine deposition, consistent with prior observations of the Murray formation. Uncommon outcrops of low-angle stratification suggest possible subaqueous currents, and steeply inclined beds may be the result of slumping. Collectively, the rocks exposed at VRR provide additional evidence for a long-lived lacustrine environment in excess of 10<SUP>6</SUP> years via comparison to terrestrial records of sedimentation, which extends our understanding of the duration of habitable conditions in Gale crater.", "title": "A Lacustrine Paleoenvironment Recorded at Vera RubinRidge, Gale Crater: Overview of the Sedimentology and Stratigraphy Observed by the Mars ScienceLaboratory Curiosity Rover"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4784354N", "abstract": "The Nadir and Occultation for MArs Discovery NOMAD instrument on board ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter measured a large increase in water vapor at altitudes in the range of 40-100 km during the 2018 global dust storm on Mars. Using a three-dimensional general circulation model, we examine the mechanism responsible for the enhancement of water vapor in the upper atmosphere. Experiments with different prescribed vertical profiles of dust show that when more dust is present higher in the atmosphere, the temperature increases, and the amount of water ascending over the tropics is not limited by saturation until reaching heights of 70-100 km. The warmer temperatures allow more water to ascend to the mesosphere. Photochemical simulations show a strong increase in high-altitude atomic hydrogen following the high-altitude water vapor increase by a few days.", "title": "Explanation for the Increase in High-Altitude Water on Mars Observed by NOMAD During the 2018 Global Dust Storm"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216....7J", "abstract": "Pressures in the hydrospheres of large ocean worlds extend to ranges exceeding those in Earth deepest oceans. In this regime, dense water ices and other high-pressure phases become thermodynamically stable and can influence planetary processes at a global scale. The presence of high-pressure ices sets large icy worlds apart from other smaller water-rich worlds and complicates their study. Here we provide an overview of the unique physical states, thermodynamics, dynamic regimes, and evolution scenarios specific to large ocean worlds where high-pressure ice polymorphs form. We start by i describing the current state of knowledge for the interior states of large icy worlds in our solar system i.e. Ganymede, Titan and Callisto. Then we ii discuss the thermodynamic and physical specifics of the relevant high-pressure materials, including ices, aqueous fluids and hydrates. While doing this we iii describe the current state of the art in modeling and understanding the dynamic regimes of high-pressure ice mantles. Based on these considerations we iv explore the different evolution scenarios for large icy worlds in our solar system. We v conclude by discussing the implications of what we know on chemical transport from the silicate core, extrapolation to exoplanetary candidate ocean worlds, limitations to habitability, differentiation diversity, and perspectives for future space exploration missions and experimental measurements.", "title": "Large Ocean Worlds with High-Pressure Ices"}, {"bibcode": "2020P&SS..18004764B", "abstract": "The Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, Security-Regolith Explorer mission will return a sample to Earth from asteroid 101955 Bennu. Digital terrain models DTMs of the asteroid, and products enabled by them, are key to understanding the origin and evolution of the asteroid, providing geological and geophysical context for the sample, maximizing the amount of sample returned, navigating the spacecraft, and ensuring the safety of the spacecraft during sampling. <P />The mission has two approaches for producing these DTMs: a camera-based approach and a lidar-based approach. We provide an overview of the methods used for these two approaches and how they fit into the originally planned mission. We also discuss a summary of tests using these plans to evaluate the expected performance of the DTMs and describe the data products derived from them.", "title": "Digital terrain mapping by the OSIRIS-REx mission"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..66.1025F", "abstract": "The magnetic white dwarfs MWDs are found either isolated or in interacting binaries. The isolated MWDs divide into two groups: a high field group 10<SUP>5</SUP> -10<SUP>9</SUP> G comprising some 13 \u00b1 4 % of all white dwarfs WDs, and a low field group B &lt;10<SUP>5</SUP> G whose incidence is currently under investigation. The situation may be similar in magnetic binaries because the bright accretion discs in low field systems hide the photosphere of their WDs thus preventing the study of their magnetic fields strength and structure. Considerable research has been devoted to the vexed question on the origin of magnetic fields. One hypothesis is that WD magnetic fields are of fossil origin, that is, their progenitors are the magnetic main-sequence Ap/Bp stars and magnetic flux is conserved during their evolution. The other hypothesis is that magnetic fields arise from binary interaction, through differential rotation, during common envelope evolution. If the two stars merge the end product is a single high field MWD. If close binaries survive and the primary develops a strong field, they may later evolve into the magnetic cataclysmic variables MCVs. The recently discovered population of hot, carbon-rich WDs exhibiting an incidence of magnetism of up to about 70% and a variability from a few minutes to a couple of days may support the merging binary hypothesis. The fields in the low field MWDs may instead arise from a dynamo mechanism taking place in convective zones during post main-sequence evolution. Should this be the case, there may be a field strength below which all WDs are magnetic and thus fields are expected to always play a role in accretion processes in close binaries. Several studies have raised the possibility of the detection of planets around MWDs. Rocky planets may be discovered by the detection of anomalous atmospheric heating of the MWD when the unipolar inductor mechanism operates whilst large gaseous planets may reveal themselves through cyclotron emission from wind-driven accretion onto the MWD. Planetary remains have recently revealed themselves in the atmospheres of about 25% of WDs that are polluted by elements such as Ca, Si, and often also Mg, Fe, Na. This pollution has been explained by ongoing accretion of planetary debris. Interestingly, the incidence of magnetism is approximately 50% in cool, hydrogen-rich, polluted WDs, suggesting that these fields may be related to differential rotation induced by some super-Jupiter bodies that have plunged into the WD. The study of isolated and accreting MWDs is likely to continue to yield exciting discoveries for many years to come.", "title": "Magnetic fields in isolated and interacting white dwarfs"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...48H", "abstract": "We review the current status of knowledge concerning the early phases of star formation during cosmic dawn. This includes the first generations of stars forming in the lowest mass dark matter halos in which cooling and condensation of gas with primordial composition is possible at very high redshift z &gt;20 , namely metal-free Population III stars, and the first generation of massive black holes forming at such early epochs, the so-called black hole seeds. The formation of black hole seeds as end states of the collapse of Population III stars, or via direct collapse scenarios, is discussed. In particular, special emphasis is given to the physics of supermassive stars as potential precursors of direct collapse black holes, in light of recent results of stellar evolution models, and of numerical simulations of the early stages of galaxy formation. Furthermore, we discuss the role of the cosmic radiation produced by the early generation of stars and black holes at high redshift in the process of reionization.", "title": "Formation of the First Stars and Black Holes"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...30F", "abstract": "The atmospheres of the four giant planets of our Solar System share a common and well-observed characteristic: they each display patterns of planetary banding, with regions of different temperatures, composition, aerosol properties and dynamics separated by strong meridional and vertical gradients in the zonal i.e., east-west winds. Remote sensing observations, from both visiting spacecraft and Earth-based astronomical facilities, have revealed the significant variation in environmental conditions from one band to the next. On Jupiter, the reflective white bands of low temperatures, elevated aerosol opacities, and enhancements of quasi-conserved chemical tracers are referred to as `zones. Conversely, the darker bands of warmer temperatures, depleted aerosols, and reductions of chemical tracers are known as `belts. On Saturn, we define cyclonic belts and anticyclonic zones via their temperature and wind characteristics, although their relation to Saturns albedo is not as clear as on Jupiter. On distant Uranus and Neptune, the exact relationships between the banded albedo contrasts and the environmental properties is a topic of active study. This review is an attempt to reconcile the observed properties of belts and zones with i the meridional overturning inferred from the convergence of eddy angular momentum into the eastward zonal jets at the cloud level on Jupiter and Saturn and the prevalence of moist convective activity in belts; and ii the opposing meridional motions inferred from the upper tropospheric temperature structure, which implies decay and dissipation of the zonal jets with altitude above the clouds. These two scenarios suggest meridional circulations in opposing directions, the former suggesting upwelling in belts, the latter suggesting upwelling in zones. Numerical simulations successfully reproduce the former, whereas there is a wealth of observational evidence in support of the latter. This presents an unresolved paradox for our current understanding of the banded structure of giant planet atmospheres, that could be addressed via a multi-tiered vertical structure of \"stacked circulation cells,\" with a natural transition from zonal jet pumping to dissipation as we move from the convectively-unstable mid-troposphere into the stably-stratified upper troposphere.", "title": "How Well Do We Understand the Belt/Zone Circulation of Giant Planet Atmospheres?"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...81A", "abstract": "Radio observations of tidal disruption events TDEs probe material ejected by the disruption of stars by supermassive black holes SMBHs, uniquely tracing the formation and evolution of jets and outflows, revealing details of the disruption hydrodynamics, and illuminating the environments around previously-dormant SMBHs. To date, observations reveal a surprisingly diverse population. A small fraction of TDEs at most a few percent have been observed to produce radio-luminous mildly relativistic jets. The remainder of the population are radio quiet, producing less luminous jets, non-relativistic outflows or, possibly, no radio emission at all. Here, we review the radio observations that have been made of TDEs to date and discuss possible explanations for their properties, focusing on detected sources and, in particular, on the two best-studied events: Sw J1644+57 and ASASSN-14li. We also discuss what we have learned about the host galaxies of TDEs from radio observations and review constraints on the rates of bright and faint radio outflows in TDEs. Upcoming X-ray, optical, near-IR, and radio surveys will greatly expand the sample of TDEs, and technological advances open the exciting possibility of discovering a sample of TDEs in the radio band unbiased by host galaxy extinction.", "title": "Radio Properties of Tidal Disruption Events"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..65..850A", "abstract": "Space very long baseline interferometry VLBI has unique applications in high-resolution imaging of the fine structure of astronomical objects and high-precision astrometry due to the key long space-Earth or space-space baselines beyond the Earths diameter. China has been actively involved in the development of space VLBI in recent years. This review briefly summarizes Chinas research progress in space VLBI and the future development plan.", "title": "Space very long baseline interferometry in China"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...68G", "abstract": "Star formation is a complex multi-scale phenomenon that is of significant importance for astrophysics in general. Stars and star formation are key pillars in observational astronomy from local star forming regions in the Milky Way up to high-redshift galaxies. From a theoretical perspective, star formation and feedback processes radiation, winds, and supernovae play a pivotal role in advancing our understanding of the physical processes at work, both individually and of their interactions. In this review we will give an overview of the main processes that are important for the understanding of star formation. We start with an observationally motivated view on star formation from a global perspective and outline the general paradigm of the life-cycle of molecular clouds, in which star formation is the key process to close the cycle. After that we focus on the thermal and chemical aspects in star forming regions, discuss turbulence and magnetic fields as well as gravitational forces. Finally, we review the most important stellar feedback mechanisms.", "title": "Physical Processes in Star Formation"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...32F", "abstract": "Recent studies of Tidal Disruption Events TDEs have revealed unexpected correlations between the TDE rate and the large-scale properties of the host galaxies. In this review, we present the host galaxy properties of all TDE candidates known to date and quantify their distributions. We consider throughout the differences between observationally-identified types of TDEs and differences from spectroscopic control samples of galaxies. We focus here on the black hole and stellar masses of TDE host galaxies, their star formation histories and stellar populations, the concentration and morphology of the optical light, the presence of AGN activity, and the extra-galactic environment of the TDE hosts. We summarize the state of several possible explanations for the links between the TDE rate and host galaxy type. We present estimates of the TDE rate for different host galaxy types and quantify the degree to which rate enhancement in some types results in rate suppression in others. We discuss the possibilities for using TDE host galaxies to assist in identifying TDEs in upcoming large transient surveys and possibilities for TDE observations to be used to study their host galaxies.", "title": "The Host Galaxies of Tidal Disruption Events"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.171...42T", "abstract": "Hayabusa2 arrived at the C-type asteroid Ryugu in June 2018. During one and a half year of the Ryugu-proximity operation, we succeeded in two rovers landing, one lander landing, two spacecraft touchdown/sample collection, one kinetic impact operation and two tiny reflective balls and one rover orbiting. Among the two successful touchdowns, the second one succeeded in collecting subsurface material exposed by the kinetic impact operation. This paper describes the asteroid proximity operation activity of the Hayabusa2 mission, and gives an overview of the achievements done so far. Some important engineering and scientific activities, which have been done in synchronous with the spacecraft operations to tackle with unexpected Ryugu environment, are also described.", "title": "Hayabusa2 mission status: Landing, roving and cratering on asteroid Ryugu"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.171...42T", "abstract": "Hayabusa2 arrived at the C-type asteroid Ryugu in June 2018. During one and a half year of the Ryugu-proximity operation, we succeeded in two rovers landing, one lander landing, two spacecraft touchdown/sample collection, one kinetic impact operation and two tiny reflective balls and one rover orbiting. Among the two successful touchdowns, the second one succeeded in collecting subsurface material exposed by the kinetic impact operation. This paper describes the asteroid proximity operation activity of the Hayabusa2 mission, and gives an overview of the achievements done so far. Some important engineering and scientific activities, which have been done in synchronous with the spacecraft operations to tackle with unexpected Ryugu environment, are also described.", "title": "Hayabusa2 mission status: Landing, roving and cratering on asteroid Ryugu"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786841S", "abstract": "Initial data from the Formosa Satellite-7/Constellation Observing System for Meteorology Ionosphere and Climate FORMOSAT-7/COSMIC-2, hereafter C2, a recently launched equatorial constellation of six satellites carrying advanced radio occultation receivers, exhibit high signal-to-noise ratio, precision, and accuracy, and the ability to provide high vertical resolution profiles of bending angles and refractivity, which contain information on temperature and water vapor in the challenging tropical atmosphere. After an initial calibration/validation phase, over 100,000 soundings of bending angles and refractivity that passed quality control in October 2019 are compared with independent data, including radiosondes, model forecasts, and analyses. The comparisons show that C2 data meet expectations of high accuracy, precision, and capability to detect superrefraction. When fully operational, the C2 satellites are expected to produce ~5,000 soundings per day, providing freely available observations that will enable improved forecasts of weather, including tropical cyclones, and weather, space weather, and climate research.", "title": "COSMIC-2 Radio Occultation Constellation: First Results"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12533271L", "abstract": "The Northern Hemisphere NH polar winter stratosphere of 2019/2020 featured an exceptionally strong and cold stratospheric polar vortex. Wave activity from the troposphere during December-February was unusually low, which allowed the polar vortex to remain relatively undisturbed. Several transient wave pulses nonetheless served to help create a reflective configuration of the stratospheric circulation by disturbing the vortex in the upper stratosphere. Subsequently, multiple downward wave coupling events took place, which aided in dynamically cooling and strengthening the polar vortex. The persistent strength of the stratospheric polar vortex was accompanied by an unprecedentedly positive phase of the Arctic Oscillation in the troposphere during January-March, which was consistent with large portions of observed surface temperature and precipitation anomalies during the season. Similarly, conditions within the strong polar vortex were ripe for allowing substantial ozone loss: The undisturbed vortex was a strong transport barrier, and temperatures were low enough to form polar stratospheric clouds for over 4 months into late March. Total column ozone amounts in the NH polar cap decreased and were the lowest ever observed in the February-April period. The unique confluence of conditions and multiple broken records makes the 2019/2020 winter and early spring a particularly extreme example of two-way coupling between the troposphere and stratosphere.", "title": "The Remarkably Strong Arctic Stratospheric Polar Vortex of Winter 2020: Links to Record-Breaking Arctic Oscillation and Ozone Loss"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRB..12518145L", "abstract": "Distributed Acoustic Sensing DAS is a novel tool in array seismology that measures the phase of backscattered laser pulses traveling in a fiber-optic cable, and relates this measurement to the axial strain induced on the cable by a propagating seismic wavefield. Combining DAS with telecommunications optical fiber networks has begun to address a range of earth science questions where cost and field logistics have historically hindered observations. Unlike classic inertial seismometers, DAS instrument response is presently unquantified. This topic includes a variable sensing element\u2014the fiber, including packaging and installation\u2014which changes between experiments. Ignoring this element, one DAS record should approximate a fixed-length strain gauge, which exactly measures Earths motion down to quasi-static frequencies relevant to geodesy. In this paper, we test this hypothesis using seismological observations of teleseismic earthquakes and microseism noise spanning the 1 to 120 s period range. We use a commercial DAS interrogator unit connected to an optical fiber previously used for telecommunication and a colocated broadband seismometer to estimate the DAS transfer function. We find a 1:1 correspondence with actual ground motion from 10-120 s. At shorter periods 1-10 s, DAS amplitude response is enhanced by 3-11 dB. Phase response is flat over this range of periods. We interpret the recovered DAS response function in terms of hypothesized fiber coupling and photonic effects. We propose this calibration methodology for future DAS experiments where seismic amplitude information is desired.", "title": "On the Broadband Instrument Response of Fiber-Optic DAS Arrays"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12531767M", "abstract": "The Global Modeling and Assimilation Office GMAO has recently released a new version of the Goddard Earth Observing System GEOS Subseasonal to Seasonal prediction S2S system, GEOS-S2S-2, that represents a substantial improvement in performance and infrastructure over the previous system. The system is described here in detail, and results are presented from forecasts, climate equillibrium simulations, and data assimilation experiments. The climate or equillibrium state of the atmosphere and ocean showed a substantial reduction in bias relative to GEOS-S2S-1. The GEOS-S2S-2 coupled reanalysis also showed substantial improvements, attributed to the assimilation of along-track absolute dynamic topography. The forecast skill on subseasonal scales showed a much improved prediction of the Madden-Julian Oscillation in GEOS-S2S-2, and on a seasonal scale the tropical Pacific forecasts show substantial improvement in the east and comparable skill to GEOS-S2S-1 in the central Pacific. GEOS-S2S-2 anomaly correlations of both land surface temperature and precipitation were comparable to GEOS-S2S-1 and showed substantially reduced root-mean-square error of surface temperature. The remaining issues described here are being addressed in the development of GEOS-S2S Version 3, and with that system GMAO will continue its tradition of maintaining a state-of-the-art seasonal prediction system for use in evaluating the impact on seasonal and decadal forecasts of assimilating newly available satellite observations, as well as evaluating additional sources of predictability in the Earth system through the expanded coupling of the Earth system model and assimilation components.", "title": "GEOS-S2S Version 2: The GMAO High-Resolution Coupled Model and Assimilation System for Seasonal Prediction"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRC..12515522H", "abstract": "The Atlantic meridional overturning circulation AMOC represents the zonally integrated stream function of meridional volume transport in the Atlantic Basin. The AMOC plays an important role in transporting heat meridionally in the climate system. Observations suggest a heat transport by the AMOC of 1.3 PW at 26\u00b0N\u2014a latitude which is close to where the Atlantic northward heat transport is thought to reach its maximum. This shapes the climate of the North Atlantic region as we know it today. In recent years there has been significant progress both in our ability to observe the AMOC in nature and to simulate it in numerical models. Most previous modeling investigations of the AMOC and its impact on climate have relied on models with horizontal resolution that does not resolve ocean mesoscale eddies and the dynamics of the Gulf Stream/North Atlantic Current system. As a result of recent increases in computing power, models are now being run that are able to represent mesoscale ocean dynamics and the circulation features that rely on them. The aim of this review is to describe new insights into the AMOC provided by high-resolution models. Furthermore, we will describe how high-resolution model simulations can help resolve outstanding challenges in our understanding of the AMOC.", "title": "The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation in High-Resolution Models"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRC..12514719H", "abstract": "Society has become increasingly reliant on plastics since commercial production began in about 1950. Their versatility, stability, light weight, and low production costs have fueled global demand. Most plastics are initially used and discarded on land. Nonetheless, the amount of microplastics in some oceanic compartments is predicted to double by 2030. To solve this global problem, we must understand plastic composition, physical forms, uses, transport, and fragmentation into microplastics and nanoplastics. Plastic debris/microplastics arise from land disposal, wastewater treatment, tire wear, paint failure, textile washing, and at-sea losses. Riverine and atmospheric transport, storm water, and disasters facilitate releases. In surface waters plastics/microplastics weather, biofoul, aggregate, and sink, are ingested by organisms and redistributed by currents. Ocean sediments are likely the ultimate destination. Plastics release additives, concentrate environmental contaminants, and serve as substrates for biofilms, including exotic and pathogenic species. Microplastic abundance increases as fragment size decreases, as does the proportion of organisms capable of ingesting them. Particles &lt;20 \u03bcm may penetrate cell membranes, exacerbating risks. Exposure can compromise feeding, metabolic processes, reproduction, and behavior. But more investigation is required to draw definitive conclusions. Human ingestion of contaminated seafood and water is a concern. Microplastics indoors present yet uncharacterized risks, magnified by the time we spend inside &gt;90% and the abundance of polymeric products therein. Scientific challenges include improving microplastic sampling and characterization approaches, understanding long-term behavior, additive bioavailability, and organismal and ecosystem health risks. Solutions include improving globally based pollution prevention, developing degradable polymers and additives, and reducing consumption/expanding plastic reuse.", "title": "A Global Perspective on Microplastics"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526169K", "abstract": "The Jovian Auroral Distributions Experiment Ion sensor JADE-I on Juno is a plasma instrument that measures the energy-per-charge E/Q distribution of 0.01 to 46.2 keV/q ions over a mass-per-charge M/Q range of 1- 64 amu/q. However, distinguishing O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> from JADE-Is measurements is a challenging task due to similarities in their M/Q \u223c16 amu/q. Because of this, O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> have not been fully resolved in the in situ measurements made by plasma instruments at Jupiter e.g., Voyager PLS and Galileo PLS and their relative ratios has been studied using physical chemistry models and ultraviolet remote observations. To resolve this ambiguity, a ray tracing simulation combined with carbon foil effects is developed and used to obtain instrument response functions for H<SUP>+</SUP>, O<SUP>+</SUP>, O<SUP>2+</SUP>, O<SUP>3+</SUP>, Na<SUP>+</SUP>, S<SUP>+</SUP>, S<SUP>2+</SUP>, and S<SUP>3+</SUP>. The simulation results indicate that JADE-I can resolve the M/Q ambiguity between O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> due to a significant difference in their charge state modification process and a presence of a large electric potential difference \u223c8 kV between its carbon foils and MCPs. A forward model based on instrument response functions and convected kappa distributions is then used to obtain ion properties at the equatorial plasma sheet \u223c36 R<SUB>J</SUB> in the predawn sector of magnetosphere. The number density ratio between O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> for the selected plasma sheet crossings ranges from 0.2 to 0.7 0.37 \u00b1 0.12 and the number density ratio between total oxygen ions to total sulfur ions ranges from 0.2 to 0.6 0.41 \u00b1 0.09.", "title": "Method to Derive Ion Properties From Juno JADE Including Abundance Estimates for O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP>"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526169K", "abstract": "The Jovian Auroral Distributions Experiment Ion sensor JADE-I on Juno is a plasma instrument that measures the energy-per-charge E/Q distribution of 0.01 to 46.2 keV/q ions over a mass-per-charge M/Q range of 1- 64 amu/q. However, distinguishing O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> from JADE-Is measurements is a challenging task due to similarities in their M/Q \u223c16 amu/q. Because of this, O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> have not been fully resolved in the in situ measurements made by plasma instruments at Jupiter e.g., Voyager PLS and Galileo PLS and their relative ratios has been studied using physical chemistry models and ultraviolet remote observations. To resolve this ambiguity, a ray tracing simulation combined with carbon foil effects is developed and used to obtain instrument response functions for H<SUP>+</SUP>, O<SUP>+</SUP>, O<SUP>2+</SUP>, O<SUP>3+</SUP>, Na<SUP>+</SUP>, S<SUP>+</SUP>, S<SUP>2+</SUP>, and S<SUP>3+</SUP>. The simulation results indicate that JADE-I can resolve the M/Q ambiguity between O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> due to a significant difference in their charge state modification process and a presence of a large electric potential difference \u223c8 kV between its carbon foils and MCPs. A forward model based on instrument response functions and convected kappa distributions is then used to obtain ion properties at the equatorial plasma sheet \u223c36 R<SUB>J</SUB> in the predawn sector of magnetosphere. The number density ratio between O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP> for the selected plasma sheet crossings ranges from 0.2 to 0.7 0.37 \u00b1 0.12 and the number density ratio between total oxygen ions to total sulfur ions ranges from 0.2 to 0.6 0.41 \u00b1 0.09.", "title": "Method to Derive Ion Properties From Juno JADE Including Abundance Estimates for O<SUP>+</SUP> and S<SUP>2+</SUP>"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...12G", "abstract": "The OSIRIS-REx Camera Suite OCAMS onboard the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft is used to study the shape and surface of the missions target, asteroid 101955 Bennu, in support of the selection of a sampling site. We present calibration methods and results for the three OCAMS cameras\u2014MapCam, PolyCam, and SamCam\u2014using data from pre-flight and in-flight calibration campaigns. Pre-flight calibrations established a baseline for a variety of camera properties, including bias and dark behavior, flat fields, stray light, and radiometric calibration. In-flight activities updated these calibrations where possible, allowing us to confidently measure Bennus surface. Accurate calibration is critical not only for establishing a global understanding of Bennu, but also for enabling analyses of potential sampling locations and for providing scientific context for the returned sample.", "title": "Ground and In-Flight Calibration of the OSIRIS-REx Camera Suite"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506115K", "abstract": "We report observations by the Mars Climate Sounder showing strong diurnal variations in temperature and the vertical dust distribution during the 2018 Mars Year 34 global dust event. The temperature field shows weak diurnal tidal activity at equatorial latitudes but a strong diurnal tide in middle to high latitudes with a maximum amplitude of 29 K in the lower atmosphere of the south polar region. The diurnal variability of dust is small in the equatorial region and increases toward higher latitudes. At middle and low latitudes, comparable dust amounts are found about 5-10 km higher in the atmosphere on the dayside than on the nightside. The dust reaches the highest altitudes in the late afternoon and is found at the lowest altitudes in the late night. In the southern high latitudes a persistent cold air mass with low dust content is identified on the nightside of the planet centered at 3-6 a.m. local time. The observed variations are well represented by model simulations with the Laboratoire de M\u00e9t\u00e9orologie Dynamique General Circulation Model. Comparisons between data and model results suggest that the diurnal variations in the dust are largely driven by the meridional circulation exhibiting diurnal tidal variations. The model results show that the compact air mass in the south polar region has a high potential vorticity, supporting its interpretation as a remnant of the southern polar vortex, which is forced toward the nightside of the planet due to the enhanced diurnal tide during the global dust event.", "title": "Diurnal Variations of Dust During the 2018 Global Dust Storm Observed by the Mars Climate Sounder"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506115K", "abstract": "We report observations by the Mars Climate Sounder showing strong diurnal variations in temperature and the vertical dust distribution during the 2018 Mars Year 34 global dust event. The temperature field shows weak diurnal tidal activity at equatorial latitudes but a strong diurnal tide in middle to high latitudes with a maximum amplitude of 29 K in the lower atmosphere of the south polar region. The diurnal variability of dust is small in the equatorial region and increases toward higher latitudes. At middle and low latitudes, comparable dust amounts are found about 5-10 km higher in the atmosphere on the dayside than on the nightside. The dust reaches the highest altitudes in the late afternoon and is found at the lowest altitudes in the late night. In the southern high latitudes a persistent cold air mass with low dust content is identified on the nightside of the planet centered at 3-6 a.m. local time. The observed variations are well represented by model simulations with the Laboratoire de M\u00e9t\u00e9orologie Dynamique General Circulation Model. Comparisons between data and model results suggest that the diurnal variations in the dust are largely driven by the meridional circulation exhibiting diurnal tidal variations. The model results show that the compact air mass in the south polar region has a high potential vorticity, supporting its interpretation as a remnant of the southern polar vortex, which is forced toward the nightside of the planet due to the enhanced diurnal tide during the global dust event.", "title": "Diurnal Variations of Dust During the 2018 Global Dust Storm Observed by the Mars Climate Sounder"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788101K", "abstract": "Fires in southeastern Australia produced at least 18 pyrocumulonimbus pyroCb between 29 December 2019 and 4 January 2020. The largest plumes from this event exhibited several previously undocumented phenomena in the stratosphere. These include i the generation of potential vorticity and anticyclonic circulations from absorptive aerosol heating, ii the formation of a vertical temperature anomaly dipole, iii the rapid ascent from the lowermost stratosphere 15-16 km to altitudes above 31 km in less than 2 months, iv an unprecedented abundance of H<SUB>2</SUB>O and CO in the stratosphere, and v the displacement of background O<SUB>3</SUB> and N<SUB>2</SUB>O from rapid ascent of air from the troposphere and lower stratosphere. Each of these phenomena is traced back to a 5-day-old stratospheric plume composed of a massive amount of aerosol and biomass burning gases from a pyroCb outbreak. Until now, there has been no documented evidence that pyroCb plumes can affect stratospheric winds.", "title": "Australian PyroCb Smoke Generates Synoptic-Scale Stratospheric Anticyclones"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526005V", "abstract": "In situ measurements of the solar wind have been available for almost 60 years, and in that time plasma physics simulation capabilities have commenced and ground-based solar observations have expanded into space-based solar observations. These observations and simulations have yielded an increasingly improved knowledge of fundamental physics and have delivered a remarkable understanding of the solar wind and its complexity. Yet there are longstanding major unsolved questions. Synthesizing inputs from the solar wind research community, nine outstanding questions of solar wind physics are developed and discussed in this commentary. These involve questions about the formation of the solar wind, about the inherent properties of the solar wind and what the properties say about its formation, and about the evolution of the solar wind. The questions focus on 1 origin locations on the Sun, 2 plasma release, 3 acceleration, 4 heavy-ion abundances and charge states, 5 magnetic structure, 6 Alfven waves, 7 turbulence, 8 distribution-function evolution, and 9 energetic-particle transport. On these nine questions we offer suggestions for future progress, forward looking on what is likely to be accomplished in near future with data from Parker Solar Probe, from Solar Orbiter, from the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope DKIST, and from Polarimeter to Unify the Corona and Heliosphere PUNCH. Calls are made for improved measurements, for higher-resolution simulations, and for advances in plasma physics theory.", "title": "Nine Outstanding Questions of Solar Wind Physics"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526005V", "abstract": "In situ measurements of the solar wind have been available for almost 60 years, and in that time plasma physics simulation capabilities have commenced and ground-based solar observations have expanded into space-based solar observations. These observations and simulations have yielded an increasingly improved knowledge of fundamental physics and have delivered a remarkable understanding of the solar wind and its complexity. Yet there are longstanding major unsolved questions. Synthesizing inputs from the solar wind research community, nine outstanding questions of solar wind physics are developed and discussed in this commentary. These involve questions about the formation of the solar wind, about the inherent properties of the solar wind and what the properties say about its formation, and about the evolution of the solar wind. The questions focus on 1 origin locations on the Sun, 2 plasma release, 3 acceleration, 4 heavy-ion abundances and charge states, 5 magnetic structure, 6 Alfven waves, 7 turbulence, 8 distribution-function evolution, and 9 energetic-particle transport. On these nine questions we offer suggestions for future progress, forward looking on what is likely to be accomplished in near future with data from Parker Solar Probe, from Solar Orbiter, from the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope DKIST, and from Polarimeter to Unify the Corona and Heliosphere PUNCH. Calls are made for improved measurements, for higher-resolution simulations, and for advances in plasma physics theory.", "title": "Nine Outstanding Questions of Solar Wind Physics"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...23S", "abstract": "Scientists have explored how energetic particles such as solar energetic particles and cosmic rays move through a magnetized plasma such as the interplanetary and interstellar medium since more than five decades. From a theoretical point of view, this topic is difficult because the particles experience complicated interactions with turbulent magnetic fields. Besides turbulent fields, there are also large scale or mean magnetic fields breaking the symmetry in such systems and one has to distinguish between transport of particles parallel and perpendicular with respect to such mean fields. In standard descriptions of transport phenomena, one often assumes that the transport in both directions is normal diffusive but non-diffusive transport was found in more recent work. This is in particular true for early and intermediate times where the diffusive regime is not yet reached. In recent years researchers employed advanced numerical tools in order to simulate the motion of those particles through the aforementioned systems. Nevertheless, the analytical description of the problem discussed here is of utmost importance since analytical forms of particle transport parameters need to be known in several applications such as solar modulation studies or investigations of shock acceleration. The latter process is directly linked to the question of what the sources of high energy cosmic rays are, a problem which is considered to be one of the most important problems of the sciences of the 21st century. The present review article discusses analytical theories developed for describing particle transport across a large scale magnetic field as well as field line random walk. A heuristic approach explaining the basic physics of perpendicular transport is also presented. Simple analytical forms for the perpendicular diffusion coefficient are proposed which can easily be incorporated in numerical codes for solar modulation or shock acceleration studies. Test-particle simulations are also discussed together with a comparison with analytical results. Several applications such as cosmic ray propagation and diffusive shock acceleration are also part of this review.", "title": "Perpendicular Transport of Energetic Particles in Magnetic Turbulence"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216....4N", "abstract": "This chapter reviews fundamental properties and recent advances of diffuse and pulsating aurora. Diffuse and pulsating aurora often occurs on closed field lines and involves energetic electron precipitation by wave-particle interaction. After summarizing the definition, large-scale morphology, types of pulsation, and driving processes, we review observation techniques, occurrence, duration, altitude, evolution, small-scale structures, fast modulation, relation to high-energy precipitation, the role of ECH waves, reflected and secondary electrons, ionosphere dynamics, and simulation of wave-particle interaction. Finally we discuss open questions of diffuse and pulsating aurora.", "title": "Diffuse and Pulsating Aurora"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...93M", "abstract": "The ESA-JAXA BepiColombo mission will provide simultaneous measurements from two spacecraft, offering an unprecedented opportunity to investigate magnetospheric and exospheric dynamics at Mercury as well as their interactions with the solar wind, radiation, and interplanetary dust. Many scientific instruments onboard the two spacecraft will be completely, or partially devoted to study the near-space environment of Mercury as well as the complex processes that govern it. Many issues remain unsolved even after the MESSENGER mission that ended in 2015. The specific orbits of the two spacecraft, MPO and Mio, and the comprehensive scientific payload allow a wider range of scientific questions to be addressed than those that could be achieved by the individual instruments acting alone, or by previous missions. These joint observations are of key importance because many phenomena in Mercurys environment are highly temporally and spatially variable. Examples of possible coordinated observations are described in this article, analysing the required geometrical conditions, pointing, resolutions and operation timing of different BepiColombo instruments sensors.", "title": "Investigating Mercury's Environment with the Two-Spacecraft BepiColombo Mission"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRC..12514378T", "abstract": "The Arctic Ocean is a focal point of climate change, with ocean warming, freshening, sea-ice decline, and circulation that link to the changing atmospheric and terrestrial environment. Major features of the Arctic and the interconnected nature of its wind- and buoyancy-driven circulation are reviewed here by presenting a synthesis of observational data interpreted from the perspective of geophysical fluid dynamics GFD. The general circulation is seen to be the superposition of Atlantic Water flowing into and around the Arctic basin and the two main wind-driven circulation features of the interior stratified Arctic Ocean: the Transpolar Drift Stream and the Beaufort Gyre. The specific drivers of these systems, including wind forcing, ice-ocean interactions, and surface buoyancy fluxes, and their associated GFD are explored. The essential understanding guides an assessment of how Arctic Ocean structure and dynamics might fundamentally change as the Arctic warms, sea-ice cover declines, and the ice that remains becomes more mobile.", "title": "Understanding Arctic Ocean Circulation: A Review of Ocean Dynamics in a Changing Climate"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785488L", "abstract": "Satellite laser ranging SLR observations have long been relied upon for measuring changes in Earths dynamic oblateness, C20. This major component of Earths time-variable gravity field is not well observed by the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment GRACE and GRACE Follow-On GRACE-FO missions, leading to the common practice of replacing their values with those obtained by SLR. The C30 coefficient, which has a large impact on the recovered Antarctic Ice Sheet mass changes, is shown here to be poorly observed by GRACE/GRACE-FO when either mission is operating without two fully functional accelerometers. The GRACE spacecraft pair operated nominally until October 2016 when one accelerometer was powered off due to battery limitations, while GRACE-FO is currently excluding one accelerometer from the data processing due to elevated noise levels. Beginning with the launch of Laser Relativity Satellite in 2012, SLR-derived C30 values are suitable for replacing any problematic GRACE/GRACE-FO estimates, enabling the accurate recovery of Antarctic Ice Sheet mass changes, among others.", "title": "Replacing GRACE/GRACE-FO C30 With Satellite Laser Ranging: Impacts on Antarctic Ice Sheet Mass Change"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4789912D", "abstract": "During the COVID-19 lockdown 24 January-20 March in China low air pollution levels were reported in the media as a consequence of reduced economic and social activities. Quantification of the pollution reduction is not straightforward due to effects of transport, meteorology, and chemistry. We have analyzed the NO<SUB>x</SUB> emission reductions calculated with an inverse algorithm applied to daily NO<SUB>2</SUB> observations from TROPOMI onboard the Copernicus Sentinel-5P satellite. This method allows the quantification of emission reductions per city and the analysis of emissions of maritime transport and of the energy sector separately. The reductions we found are 20-50% for cities, about 40% for power plants, and 15-40% for maritime transport depending on the region. The reduction in both emissions and concentrations shows a similar timeline consisting of a sharp reduction 34-50% around the Spring festival and a slow recovery from mid-February to mid-March.", "title": "NOx Emissions Reduction and Rebound in China Due to the COVID-19 Crisis"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786729R", "abstract": "Fully coupled climate models have long shown a wide range of Antarctic sea ice states and evolution over the satellite era. Here, we present a high-level evaluation of Antarctic sea ice in 40 models from the most recent phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project CMIP6. Many models capture key characteristics of the mean seasonal cycle of sea ice area SIA, but some simulate implausible historical mean states compared to satellite observations, leading to large intermodel spread. Summer SIA is consistently biased low across the ensemble. Compared to the previous model generation CMIP5, the intermodel spread in winter and summer SIA has reduced, and the regional distribution of sea ice concentration has improved. Over 1979-2018, many models simulate strong negative trends in SIA concurrently with stronger-than-observed trends in global mean surface temperature GMST. By the end of the 21st century, models project clear differences in sea ice between forcing scenarios.", "title": "Antarctic Sea Ice Area in CMIP6"}, {"bibcode": "2020E&SS....700897E", "abstract": "A data set of earthquake hypocenters and associated traveltime residuals for seismic phases recorded by seismograph stations globally is an essential starting point for most studies of global seismicity and Earth structure. Such data sets have been produced in various forms by national and international agencies since the beginning of instrumental seismology at the turn of the twentieth century. We have reprocessed the comprehensive data used to produce the routinely distributed bulletins of the International Seismological Centre ISC since 1964 to construct a new refined data set of hypocenters with improved focal depths and phase residuals. This data set, called ISC-EHB, is used to reveal features of the seismotectonic zones in downgoing slabs in greater detail than previously routinely available.", "title": "ISC-EHB 1964-2016, an Improved Data Set for Studies of Earth Structure and Global Seismicity"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532024Z", "abstract": "The GOES-16 Geostationary Lightning Mapper GLM detection efficiency DE is studied over a full year 2018/19 in central Florida using the Kennedy Space Center Lightning Mapping Array KSC LMA. Mean daily flash DE was 73.8%, and detection was highest during nighttime hours. GLM reported 86.5% of the LMA flashes that had coincident cloud-to-ground return strokes reported by the U.S. National Lightning Detection Network. Results also reveal that flash size and duration are critical parameters influencing GLM detection, regardless of the storm type, with 20-40% detection for small and short-duration flashes and greater than 95% detection for very large and long-duration flashes. These findings can be explained by examining the time-evolution of cloud-top optical emissions observed by the Lightning Imaging Sensor LIS. Statistical simulations based on long-term LIS group area observations indicate that about half of the above-threshold light sources are smaller than a LIS pixel ~ 4 \u00d7 4 km and are smallest during and just after an initial breakdown in IC flashes. This work also demonstrates that for sources smaller than a GLM pixel, the cloud-top energy detection threshold for GLM is double that for LIS despite GLMs lower energy density threshold. Overall, these findings provide a framework for interpreting GLM performance under varying meteorological conditions, and help explain reports of low flash detection efficiency for storms associated with severe weather, as they typically exhibit high flash rates and resulting small and short-duration flashes.", "title": "Time Evolution of Satellite-Based Optical Properties in Lightning Flashes, and its Impact on GLM Flash Detection"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12530922M", "abstract": "Soot particles are generally considered to be poor ice nucleating particles. Involvement of soot in clouds and their release back into the atmosphere can form residual particles with altered cloud forming potential. The impact and extent of such different cloud processing scenarios on ice nucleation is, however, not well understood. In this work, we present the impact of cloud processing of soot aerosols on subsequent ice nucleation cycles at T\u2264233 K. Coupling of two continuous flow diffusion chambers allows the simulation of different cloud processing scenarios and investigation of subsequent ice nucleation activity of the processed particles. The processing scenarios presented here encompass contrail, cirrus, and mixed-phase cloud processing, mimicking typical pathways that soot particles can be exposed to in the atmosphere. For all scenarios tested, the processed particles showed an enhanced ice active fraction for T&lt;233 K. The relative humidity with respect to water for the ice nucleation onset was observed to be on average approximately 10% relative humidity with respect to ice, RH<SUB>i</SUB>\u224816% lower for the cloud-processed particles compared to the unprocessed soot for which ice nucleation was observed close to or at homogeneous freezing conditions of solution droplets. We attribute the enhanced ice nucleation abilities of the cloud-processed soot to a pore condensation and freezing mechanism and have identified key parameters governing these changes. Enhanced ice nucleation abilities of soot in cirrus clouds can have significant impacts, given the importance of the atmospheric ice phase for precipitation formation and global climate.", "title": "The Impact of Cloud Processing on the Ice Nucleation Abilities of Soot Particles at Cirrus Temperatures"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506475J", "abstract": "The exploration of near-Earth asteroids has revealed dynamic surfaces characterized by mobile, unconsolidated material that responds to local geophysical gradients, resulting in distinct morphologies and boulder distributions. The OSIRIS-REx Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, and Security-Regolith Explorer mission confirmed that asteroid 101955 Bennu is a rubble pile with an unconsolidated surface dominated by boulders. In this work, we documented morphologies indicative of mass movement on Bennu and assessed the relationship to slope and other geologic features on the surface. We found globally distributed morphologic evidence of mass movement on Bennu up to ~70\u00b0 latitude and on spatial scales ranging from individual boulders meter scale to a single debris flow ~100 m long and several meters thick. The apparent direction of mass movement is consistent with the local downslope direction and dominantly moves from the midlatitudes toward the equator. Mass movement appears to have altered the surface expression of large \u226530m diameter boulders, excavating them in the midlatitudes and burying them in the equatorial region. Up to a 10 \u00b1 1 m depth of material may have been transported away from the midlatitudes, which would have deposited a layer ~5 \u00b1 1 m thick in the equatorial region assuming a stagnated flow model. This mass movement could explain the observed paucity of small &lt;50-m diameter craters and may have contributed material to Bennus equatorial ridge. Models of changes in slope suggest that the midlatitude mass movement occurred in the past several hundred thousand years in regions that became steeper by several degrees.", "title": "Global Patterns of Recent Mass Movement on Asteroid (101955) Bennu"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506475J", "abstract": "The exploration of near-Earth asteroids has revealed dynamic surfaces characterized by mobile, unconsolidated material that responds to local geophysical gradients, resulting in distinct morphologies and boulder distributions. The OSIRIS-REx Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, and Security-Regolith Explorer mission confirmed that asteroid 101955 Bennu is a rubble pile with an unconsolidated surface dominated by boulders. In this work, we documented morphologies indicative of mass movement on Bennu and assessed the relationship to slope and other geologic features on the surface. We found globally distributed morphologic evidence of mass movement on Bennu up to ~70\u00b0 latitude and on spatial scales ranging from individual boulders meter scale to a single debris flow ~100 m long and several meters thick. The apparent direction of mass movement is consistent with the local downslope direction and dominantly moves from the midlatitudes toward the equator. Mass movement appears to have altered the surface expression of large \u226530m diameter boulders, excavating them in the midlatitudes and burying them in the equatorial region. Up to a 10 \u00b1 1 m depth of material may have been transported away from the midlatitudes, which would have deposited a layer ~5 \u00b1 1 m thick in the equatorial region assuming a stagnated flow model. This mass movement could explain the observed paucity of small &lt;50-m diameter craters and may have contributed material to Bennus equatorial ridge. Models of changes in slope suggest that the midlatitude mass movement occurred in the past several hundred thousand years in regions that became steeper by several degrees.", "title": "Global Patterns of Recent Mass Movement on Asteroid (101955) Bennu"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12531919R", "abstract": "Using the real-time predictions from 11 models, this study analyzes the prediction of the downward propagation and surface impact of the 2018 and 2019 sudden stratospheric warmings SSWs. These two SSWs differed both in their morphology types 2018: split; 2019: displacement followed by split and magnitudes the former being stronger. With a large sample size &gt;2,200 of multimodel ensemble forecasts, it is revealed that the strength of the SSW is more important than the vortex morphology in determining the magnitude of its downward impact, with strong SSWs more likely to propagate downward than weak SSWs. Therefore, based on the probabilistic forecasts, the observed strong SSW in February 2018 was more likely to have a downward and surface impact than the January 2019 SSW. The relationship between the 10-hPa dominant wave number and the 100-hPa polar cap height or the Northern Annular Mode is weak, implying that the dominant wave number might not be the primary factor determining the downward propagation of SSWs in the two analyzed cases. Hence, the high polar cap height or negative Northern Annular Mode response in the lower stratosphere and troposphere following the February 2018 SSW is mainly attributed to its strong intensity rather than the split morphology. Further, the 2-m temperature anomaly pattern following the January 2019 SSW is not forecasted due to its weak downward propagation, whereas the 2-m temperature in North Eurasia, Middle East, south China, and eastern United States could be forecasted for the downward propagating February 2018 SSW. However, regional rainfall anomalies are poorly forecasted both in a deterministic and probabilistic sense for both SSWs.", "title": "Predicting the Downward and Surface Influence of the February 2018 and January 2019 Sudden Stratospheric Warming Events in Subseasonal to Seasonal (S2S) Models"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785987G", "abstract": "We use test particle simulations to model the interaction between radiation belt electrons and whistler mode chorus waves by focusing on wave amplitude modulations. We quantify the pitch angle and energy changes due to phase trapping and phase bunching including both advection and scattering for electrons with various initial energies and pitch angles. Three nonlinear regimes are identified in a broad range of pitch angle-energy space systematically, each indicating different nonlinear effects. Our simulation results show that wave amplitude modulations can extend the nonlinear regimes, while significantly reducing electron acceleration by phase trapping. By including amplitude modulations, the \"advective\" changes in pitch angle and energy caused by phase bunching are reduced, while the \"diffusive\" scattering due to phase bunching is enhanced. Our study demonstrates the importance of wave amplitude modulations in nonlinear effects and suggests that they need to be properly incorporated into future theoretical and numerical studies.", "title": "Nonlinear Interactions Between Radiation Belt Electrons and Chorus Waves: Dependence on Wave Amplitude Modulation"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527433M", "abstract": "An updated yield function for a standard NM64 neutron monitor NM is computed and extended to different atmospheric depths from sea level to 500 g/cm<SUP>2</SUP> \u223c5.7 km altitude and is presented as lookup tables and a full parametrization. The yield function was validated using the cosmic ray spectra directly measured in space by the AMS-02 experiment during the period May 2011 through May 2017 and confronted with count rates of all NM64-type NMs being in operation during this period. Using this approach, stability of all the selected NMs was analyzed for the period 2011-2017. Most of NMs appear very stable and suitable for studies of long-term solar modulation of cosmic rays. However, some NMs suffer from instabilities like trends, apparent jumps, or strong seasonal waves in the count rates.", "title": "Updated Neutron-Monitor Yield Function: Bridging Between In Situ and Ground-Based Cosmic Ray Measurements"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527433M", "abstract": "An updated yield function for a standard NM64 neutron monitor NM is computed and extended to different atmospheric depths from sea level to 500 g/cm<SUP>2</SUP> \u223c5.7 km altitude and is presented as lookup tables and a full parametrization. The yield function was validated using the cosmic ray spectra directly measured in space by the AMS-02 experiment during the period May 2011 through May 2017 and confronted with count rates of all NM64-type NMs being in operation during this period. Using this approach, stability of all the selected NMs was analyzed for the period 2011-2017. Most of NMs appear very stable and suitable for studies of long-term solar modulation of cosmic rays. However, some NMs suffer from instabilities like trends, apparent jumps, or strong seasonal waves in the count rates.", "title": "Updated Neutron-Monitor Yield Function: Bridging Between In Situ and Ground-Based Cosmic Ray Measurements"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532579T", "abstract": "A carbonaceous aerosol plume associated with wildfires in British Columbia in August 2017 reached the stratosphere a few days following the fires onset. The Earth Polychromatic Imaging Camera EPIC sensor onboard the Deep Space Climate Observatory DSCOVR satellite observed the spatial and temporal evolution of the plume for about 6 weeks. EPICs near-hourly observations of the Earths sunlit disk allowed for monitoring the smoke plume several times per day. High ultraviolet aerosol index values pointed to the presence of an aerosol layer in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere, confirmed with Cloud-Aerosol Lidar with Orthogonal Polarization CALIOP lidar observations. EPIC aerosol optical depth retrievals and CALIOP information on layer height were used to estimate the stratospheric portion of the aerosol mass, reaching a maximum of 268 \u00b1 86 Kt 3 days after the onset of the wildfires. About 10% of this aerosol mass reached the stratosphere on 13 August, whereas the remaining 90% did so over the following 2 days. Observed daytime and inferred nighttime rates of stratospheric aerosol mass increase showed a more rapid daytime increase, consistent with variability in diurnal insolation, suggesting that solar radiation driven processes may have contributed to the observed stratospheric aerosol mass increase. Global modeling results support the possible role of diabatic aerosol self-lofting. Ozone Mapping and Profiler Suite Limb Profiler OMPS-LP aerosol retrievals showed the spread of stratospheric aerosols in the Northern Hemisphere, reaching peak concentration between October 2017 and January 2018, when about half the Northern Hemisphere experienced a detectable enhancement of stratospheric aerosols with respect to preinjection conditions. The lifetime and aerosol mass of this smoke event were comparable to those of a moderate volcanic eruption.", "title": "Stratospheric Injection of Massive Smoke Plume From Canadian Boreal Fires in 2017 as Seen by DSCOVR-EPIC, CALIOP, and OMPS-LP Observations"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526735R", "abstract": "The past decade transformed our observational understanding of energetic particle processes in near-Earth space. An unprecedented suite of observational systems was in operation including the Van Allen Probes, Arase, Magnetospheric Multiscale, Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms, Cluster, GPS, GOES, and Los Alamos National Laboratory-GEO magnetospheric missions. They were supported by conjugate low-altitude measurements on spacecraft, balloons, and ground-based arrays. Together, these significantly improved our ability to determine and quantify the mechanisms that control the buildup and subsequent variability of energetic particle intensities in the inner magnetosphere. The high-quality data from National Aeronautics and Space Administrations Van Allen Probes are the most comprehensive in situ measurements ever taken in the near-Earth space radiation environment. These observations, coupled with recent advances in radiation belt theory and modeling, including dramatic increases in computational power, have ushered in a new era, perhaps a \"golden era,\" in radiation belt research. We have edited a Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Science Special Collection dedicated to Particle Dynamics in the Earths Radiation Belts in which we gather the most recent scientific findings and understanding of this important region of geospace. This collection includes the results presented at the American Geophysical Union Chapman International Conference in Cascais, Portugal March 2018 and many other recent and relevant contributions. The present article introduces and review the context, current research, and main questions that motivate modern radiation belt research divided into the following topics: 1 particle acceleration and transport, 2 particle loss, 3 the role of nonlinear processes, 4 new radiation belt modeling capabilities and the quantification of model uncertainties, and 5 laboratory plasma experiments.", "title": "Particle Dynamics in the Earth's Radiation Belts: Review of Current Research and Open Questions"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526735R", "abstract": "The past decade transformed our observational understanding of energetic particle processes in near-Earth space. An unprecedented suite of observational systems was in operation including the Van Allen Probes, Arase, Magnetospheric Multiscale, Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms, Cluster, GPS, GOES, and Los Alamos National Laboratory-GEO magnetospheric missions. They were supported by conjugate low-altitude measurements on spacecraft, balloons, and ground-based arrays. Together, these significantly improved our ability to determine and quantify the mechanisms that control the buildup and subsequent variability of energetic particle intensities in the inner magnetosphere. The high-quality data from National Aeronautics and Space Administrations Van Allen Probes are the most comprehensive in situ measurements ever taken in the near-Earth space radiation environment. These observations, coupled with recent advances in radiation belt theory and modeling, including dramatic increases in computational power, have ushered in a new era, perhaps a \"golden era,\" in radiation belt research. We have edited a Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Science Special Collection dedicated to Particle Dynamics in the Earths Radiation Belts in which we gather the most recent scientific findings and understanding of this important region of geospace. This collection includes the results presented at the American Geophysical Union Chapman International Conference in Cascais, Portugal March 2018 and many other recent and relevant contributions. The present article introduces and review the context, current research, and main questions that motivate modern radiation belt research divided into the following topics: 1 particle acceleration and transport, 2 particle loss, 3 the role of nonlinear processes, 4 new radiation belt modeling capabilities and the quantification of model uncertainties, and 5 laboratory plasma experiments.", "title": "Particle Dynamics in the Earth's Radiation Belts: Review of Current Research and Open Questions"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506276W", "abstract": "One popular view of Venus climate history describes a world that has spent much of its life with surface liquid water, plate tectonics, and a stable temperate climate. Part of the basis for this optimistic scenario is the high deuterium to hydrogen ratio from the Pioneer Venus mission that was interpreted to imply Venus had a shallow oceans worth of water throughout much of its history. Another view is that Venus had a long-lived \u223c100 million years primordial magma ocean with a CO<SUB>2</SUB> and steam atmosphere. Venus long-lived steam atmosphere would sufficient time to dissociate most of the water vapor, allow significant hydrogen escape, and oxidize the magma ocean. A third scenario is that Venus had surface water and habitable conditions early in its history for a short period of time &lt;1 Gyr, but that a moist/runaway greenhouse took effect because of a gradually warming Sun, leaving the planet desiccated ever since. Using a general circulation model, we demonstrate the viability of the first scenario using the few observational constraints available. We further speculate that large igneous provinces and the global resurfacing hundreds of millions of years ago played key roles in ending the clement period in its history and presenting the Venus we see today. The results have implications for what astronomers term \"the habitable zone,\" and if Venus-like exoplanets exist with clement conditions akin to modern Earth, we propose to place them in what we term the \"optimistic Venus zone.\"", "title": "Venusian Habitable Climate Scenarios: Modeling Venus Through Time and Applications to Slowly Rotating Venus-Like Exoplanets"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506276W", "abstract": "One popular view of Venus climate history describes a world that has spent much of its life with surface liquid water, plate tectonics, and a stable temperate climate. Part of the basis for this optimistic scenario is the high deuterium to hydrogen ratio from the Pioneer Venus mission that was interpreted to imply Venus had a shallow oceans worth of water throughout much of its history. Another view is that Venus had a long-lived \u223c100 million years primordial magma ocean with a CO<SUB>2</SUB> and steam atmosphere. Venus long-lived steam atmosphere would sufficient time to dissociate most of the water vapor, allow significant hydrogen escape, and oxidize the magma ocean. A third scenario is that Venus had surface water and habitable conditions early in its history for a short period of time &lt;1 Gyr, but that a moist/runaway greenhouse took effect because of a gradually warming Sun, leaving the planet desiccated ever since. Using a general circulation model, we demonstrate the viability of the first scenario using the few observational constraints available. We further speculate that large igneous provinces and the global resurfacing hundreds of millions of years ago played key roles in ending the clement period in its history and presenting the Venus we see today. The results have implications for what astronomers term \"the habitable zone,\" and if Venus-like exoplanets exist with clement conditions akin to modern Earth, we propose to place them in what we term the \"optimistic Venus zone.\"", "title": "Venusian Habitable Climate Scenarios: Modeling Venus Through Time and Applications to Slowly Rotating Venus-Like Exoplanets"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527639G", "abstract": "The habitability of the surface of any planet is determined by a complex evolution of its interior, surface, and atmosphere. The electromagnetic and particle radiation of stars drive thermal, chemical, and physical alteration of planetary atmospheres, including escape. Many known extrasolar planets experience vastly different stellar environments than those in our solar system: It is crucial to understand the broad range of processes that lead to atmospheric escape and evolution under a wide range of conditions if we are to assess the habitability of worlds around other stars. One problem encountered between the planetary and the astrophysics communities is a lack of common language for describing escape processes. Each community has customary approximations that may be questioned by the other, such as the hypothesis of H-dominated thermosphere for astrophysicists or the Sun-like nature of the stars for planetary scientists. Since exoplanets are becoming one of the main targets for the detection of life, a common set of definitions and hypotheses are required. We review the different escape mechanisms proposed for the evolution of planetary and exoplanetary atmospheres. We propose a common definition for the different escape mechanisms, and we show the important parameters to take into account when evaluating the escape at a planet in time. We show that the paradigm of the magnetic field as an atmospheric shield should be changed and that recent work on the history of Xenon in Earths atmosphere gives an elegant explanation to its enrichment in heavier isotopes: the so-called Xenon paradox.", "title": "Atmospheric Escape Processes and Planetary Atmospheric Evolution"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527639G", "abstract": "The habitability of the surface of any planet is determined by a complex evolution of its interior, surface, and atmosphere. The electromagnetic and particle radiation of stars drive thermal, chemical, and physical alteration of planetary atmospheres, including escape. Many known extrasolar planets experience vastly different stellar environments than those in our solar system: It is crucial to understand the broad range of processes that lead to atmospheric escape and evolution under a wide range of conditions if we are to assess the habitability of worlds around other stars. One problem encountered between the planetary and the astrophysics communities is a lack of common language for describing escape processes. Each community has customary approximations that may be questioned by the other, such as the hypothesis of H-dominated thermosphere for astrophysicists or the Sun-like nature of the stars for planetary scientists. Since exoplanets are becoming one of the main targets for the detection of life, a common set of definitions and hypotheses are required. We review the different escape mechanisms proposed for the evolution of planetary and exoplanetary atmospheres. We propose a common definition for the different escape mechanisms, and we show the important parameters to take into account when evaluating the escape at a planet in time. We show that the paradigm of the magnetic field as an atmospheric shield should be changed and that recent work on the history of Xenon in Earths atmosphere gives an elegant explanation to its enrichment in heavier isotopes: the so-called Xenon paradox.", "title": "Atmospheric Escape Processes and Planetary Atmospheric Evolution"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216..140V", "abstract": "The heating of the solar chromosphere and corona to the observed high temperatures, imply the presence of ongoing heating that balances the strong radiative and thermal conduction losses expected in the solar atmosphere. It has been theorized for decades that the required heating mechanisms of the chromospheric and coronal parts of the active regions, quiet-Sun, and coronal holes are associated with the solar magnetic fields. However, the exact physical process that transport and dissipate the magnetic energy which ultimately leads to the solar plasma heating are not yet fully understood. The current understanding of coronal heating relies on two main mechanism: reconnection and MHD waves that may have various degrees of importance in different coronal regions. In this review we focus on recent advances in our understanding of MHD wave heating mechanisms. First, we focus on giving an overview of observational results, where we show that different wave modes have been discovered in the corona in the last decade, many of which are associated with a significant energy flux, either generated in situ or pumped from the lower solar atmosphere. Afterwards, we summarise the recent findings of numerical modelling of waves, motivated by the observational results. Despite the advances, only 3D MHD models with Alfv\u00e9n wave heating in an unstructured corona can explain the observed coronal temperatures compatible with the quiet Sun, while 3D MHD wave heating models including cross-field density structuring are not yet able to account for the heating of coronal loops in active regions to their observed temperature.", "title": "Coronal Heating by MHD Waves"}, {"bibcode": "2020STP.....6a...3K", "abstract": "This paper provides an overview of the state-of-the-art studies of oscillatory processes in solar and stellar flares, based on modern observational data from ground-based and space-borne instruments with high temporal, spatial, and spectral resolution in different bands of the electromagnetic spectrum. We examine the mecha-nisms that generate flare emission and its quasi-periodic modulation. We discuss similarities and differences between solar and stellar flares, and address associated problems of superflares on the Sun and space weather. Quasi-periodic pulsations QPPs of flare emission are shown to be an effective tool for diagnosing both the flare processes themselves and the parameters of flaring plasmas and accelerated particles. We consider types of QPPs, their statistical properties, and methods of analysis, taking into account the non-stationarity of the QPP parameters. We review the proposed mechanisms of QPPs and summarize open questions.", "title": "Quasi-Periodic Pulsations in Solar and Stellar Flares. Review"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...43Z", "abstract": "Recent observations have suggested that circumstellar disks may commonly form around young stellar objects. Although the formation of circumstellar disks can be a natural result of the conservation of angular momentum in the parent cloud, theoretical studies instead show disk formation to be difficult from dense molecular cores magnetized to a realistic level, owing to efficient magnetic braking that transports a large fraction of the angular momentum away from the circumstellar region. We review recent progress in the formation and early evolution of disks around young stellar objects of both low-mass and high-mass, with an emphasis on mechanisms that may bridge the gap between observation and theory, including non-ideal MHD effects and asymmetric perturbations in the collapsing core e.g., magnetic field misalignment and turbulence. We also address the associated processes of outflow launching and the formation of multiple systems, and discuss possible implications in properties of protoplanetary disks.", "title": "Formation and Evolution of Disks Around Young Stellar Objects"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..66..469B", "abstract": "GipsyX/RTGx is the Jet Propulsion Laboratorys JPL next generation software package for positioning, navigation, timing, and Earth science using measurements from three geodetic techniques: Global Navigation Satellite Systems GNSS, Satellite Laser Ranging SLR, and Doppler Orbitography and Radiopositioning Integrated by Satellite DORIS; with Very Long Baseline Interferometry VLBI under development. The software facilitates combined estimation of geodetic and geophysical parameters using a Kalman filter approach on real or simulated data in both post-processing and in real-time. The estimated parameters include station coordinates and velocities, satellite orbits and clocks, Earth orientation, ionospheric and tropospheric delays. The software is also capable of full realization of a dynamic terrestrial reference through analysis and combination of time series of ground station coordinates. <P />Applying lessons learned from its predecessors, GIPSY-OASIS and Real Time GIPSY RTG, GipsyX/RTGx was re-designed from the ground up to offer improved precision, accuracy, usability, and operational flexibility. We present some key aspects of its new architecture, and describe some of its major applications, including Real-time orbit determination and ephemeris predictions in the U.S. Air Force Next Generation GPS Operational Control Segment OCX, as well as in JPLs Global Differential GPS GDGPS System, supporting User Range Error URE of &lt; 5 cm RMS; precision post-processing GNSS orbit determination, including JPLs contributions to the International GNSS Service IGS with URE in the 2 cm RMS range; Precise point positioning PPP with ambiguity resolution, both statically and kinematically, for geodetic applications with 2 mm horizontal, and 6.5 mm vertical repeatability for static positioning; Operational orbit and clock determination for Low Earth Orbiting LEO satellites, such as NASAs Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment GRACE mission with GRACE relative clock alignment at the 20 ps level; calibration of radio occultation data from LEO satellites for weather forecasting and climate studies; Satellite Laser Ranging SLR to GNSS and LEO satellites, DORIS-based and multi-technique orbit determination for LEO; production of terrestrial reference frames and Earth rotation parameters in support of JPLs contribution to the International Terrestrial Reference Frame ITRF.", "title": "GipsyX/RTGx, a new tool set for space geodetic operations and research"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...64K", "abstract": "Star clusters form in dense, hierarchically collapsing gas clouds. Bulk kinetic energy is transformed to turbulence with stars forming from cores fed by filaments. In the most compact regions, stellar feedback is least effective in removing the gas and stars may form very efficiently. These are also the regions where, in high-mass clusters, ejecta from some kind of high-mass stars are effectively captured during the formation phase of some of the low mass stars and channeled into the latter to form multiple populations. Star formation epochs in star clusters are generally set by gas flows that determine the abundance of gas in the cluster. We argue that there is likely only one star formation epoch after which clusters remain essentially clear of gas by cluster winds. Collisional dynamics is important in this phase leading to core collapse, expansion and eventual dispersion of every cluster. We review recent developments in the field with a focus on theoretical work.", "title": "The Physics of Star Cluster Formation and Evolution"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...21F", "abstract": "Atmospheric circulation patterns derived from multi-spectral remote sensing can serve as a guide for choosing a suitable entry location for a future in situ probe mission to the Ice Giants. Since the Voyager-2 flybys in the 1980s, three decades of observations from ground- and space-based observatories have generated a picture of Ice Giant circulation that is complex, perplexing, and altogether unlike that seen on the Gas Giants. This review seeks to reconcile the various competing circulation patterns from an observational perspective, accounting for spatially-resolved measurements of: zonal albedo contrasts and banded appearances; cloud-tracked zonal winds; temperature and para-H<SUB>2</SUB> measurements above the condensate clouds; and equator-to-pole contrasts in condensable volatiles methane, ammonia, and hydrogen sulphide in the deeper troposphere. These observations identify three distinct latitude domains: an equatorial domain of deep upwelling and upper-tropospheric subsidence, potentially bounded by peaks in the retrograde zonal jet and analogous to Jovian cyclonic belts; a mid-latitude transitional domain of upper-tropospheric upwelling, vigorous cloud activity, analogous to Jovian anticyclonic zones; and a polar domain of strong subsidence, volatile depletion, and small-scale and potentially seasonally-variable convective activity. Taken together, the multi-wavelength observations suggest a tiered structure of stacked circulation cells at least two in the troposphere and one in the stratosphere, potentially separated in the vertical by i strong molecular weight gradients associated with cloud condensation, and by ii transitions from a thermally-direct circulation regime at depth to a wave- and radiative-driven circulation regime at high altitude. The inferred circulation can be tested in the coming decade by 3D numerical simulations of the atmosphere, and by observations from future world-class facilities. The carrier spacecraft for any probe entry mission must ultimately carry a suite of remote-sensing instruments capable of fully constraining the atmospheric motions at the probe descent location.", "title": "Ice Giant Circulation Patterns: Implications for Atmospheric Probes"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...44C", "abstract": "This chapter reviews the estimates of the dust-to-gas and refractory-to-ice mass ratios derived from Rosetta measurements in the lost materials and the nucleus of 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko, respectively. First, the measurements by Rosetta instruments are described, as well as relevant characteristics of 67P. The complex picture of the activity of 67P, with its extreme North-South seasonal asymmetry, is presented. Individual estimates of the dust-to-gas and refractory-to-ice mass ratios are then presented and compared, showing wide ranges of plausible values. Rosettas wealth of information suggests that estimates of the dust-to-gas mass ratio made in cometary comae at a single point in time may not be fully representative of the refractory-to-ice mass ratio within the cometary nuclei being observed.", "title": "Dust-to-Gas and Refractory-to-Ice Mass Ratios of Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko from Rosetta Observations"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216..124V", "abstract": "The existence of optical-ultraviolet Tidal Disruption Events TDEs could be considered surprising because their electromagnetic output was originally predicted to be dominated by X-ray emission from an accretion disk. Yet over the last decade, the growth of optical transient surveys has led to the identification of a new class of optical transients occurring exclusively in galaxy centers, many of which are considered to be TDEs. Here we review the observed properties of these events, identified based on a shared set of both photometric and spectroscopic properties. We present a homogeneous analysis of 33 sources that we classify as robust TDEs, and which we divide into classes. The criteria used here to classify TDEs will possibly get updated as new samples are collected and potential additional diversity of TDEs is revealed. We also summarize current measurements of the optical-ultraviolet TDE rate, as well as the mass function and luminosity function. Many open questions exist regarding the current sample of events. We anticipate that the search for answers will unlock new insights in a variety of fields, from accretion physics to galaxy evolution.", "title": "Optical-Ultraviolet Tidal Disruption Events"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506011B", "abstract": "A well-preserved, ancient delta deposit, in combination with ample exposures of carbonate outcrops, makes Jezero Crater in Nili Fossae a compelling astrobiological site. We use Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars CRISM observations to characterize the surface mineralogy of the crater and surrounding watershed. Previous studies have documented the occurrence of olivine and carbonates in the Nili Fossae region. We focus on correlations between these two well-studied lithologies in the Jezero crater watershed. We map the position and shape of the olivine 1 \u03bcm absorption band and find that carbonates are found in association with olivine which displays a 1 \u03bcm band shifted to long wavelengths. We then use Thermal Emission Imaging Spectrometer THEMIS coverage of Nili Fossae and perform tests to investigate whether the long wavelength shifted redshifted olivine signature is correlated with high thermal inertia outcrops. We find that there is no consistent correlation between thermal inertia and the unique olivine signature. We discuss a range of formation scenarios for the olivine and carbonate associations, including the possibility that these lithologies are products of serpentinization reactions on early Mars. These lithologies provide an opportunity for deepening our understanding of early Mars and, given their antiquity, may provide a framework to study the timing of valley networks and the thermal history of the Martian crust and interior from the early Noachian to today.", "title": "Olivine-Carbonate Mineralogy of the Jezero Crater Region"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506011B", "abstract": "A well-preserved, ancient delta deposit, in combination with ample exposures of carbonate outcrops, makes Jezero Crater in Nili Fossae a compelling astrobiological site. We use Compact Reconnaissance Imaging Spectrometer for Mars CRISM observations to characterize the surface mineralogy of the crater and surrounding watershed. Previous studies have documented the occurrence of olivine and carbonates in the Nili Fossae region. We focus on correlations between these two well-studied lithologies in the Jezero crater watershed. We map the position and shape of the olivine 1 \u03bcm absorption band and find that carbonates are found in association with olivine which displays a 1 \u03bcm band shifted to long wavelengths. We then use Thermal Emission Imaging Spectrometer THEMIS coverage of Nili Fossae and perform tests to investigate whether the long wavelength shifted redshifted olivine signature is correlated with high thermal inertia outcrops. We find that there is no consistent correlation between thermal inertia and the unique olivine signature. We discuss a range of formation scenarios for the olivine and carbonate associations, including the possibility that these lithologies are products of serpentinization reactions on early Mars. These lithologies provide an opportunity for deepening our understanding of early Mars and, given their antiquity, may provide a framework to study the timing of valley networks and the thermal history of the Martian crust and interior from the early Noachian to today.", "title": "Olivine-Carbonate Mineralogy of the Jezero Crater Region"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527707T", "abstract": "This work presents the first detailed analysis of foreshock bubbles FBs using high-resolution Magnetospheric Multiscale MMS data. Between October 2017 and January 2019, MMS captured 10 foreshock transient events with burst resolution data that we show are consistent with FBs. One \"textbook\" event is examined and described in detail. Employing the multipoint nature of MMS, we demonstrate how the size and orientation, expansion speed, and distance since formation can be estimated. From all 10 events, FB sizes ranged from 1.1 to 9.9 R<SUB>E</SUB> average of 4.4 R<SUB>E</SUB>, and expansion speeds ranged from 139 to 377 km/s average of 257 km/s. FBs formed under a usual range of solar wind conditions between 3 and 20 R<SUB>E</SUB> upstream of Earths bow shock. We also report on new features of FBs: deep and localized magnetic \"holes\" within the cores of FBs, where the total field strength drops to &lt;1 nT.", "title": "Microscopic, Multipoint Characterization of Foreshock Bubbles With Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS)"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527707T", "abstract": "This work presents the first detailed analysis of foreshock bubbles FBs using high-resolution Magnetospheric Multiscale MMS data. Between October 2017 and January 2019, MMS captured 10 foreshock transient events with burst resolution data that we show are consistent with FBs. One \"textbook\" event is examined and described in detail. Employing the multipoint nature of MMS, we demonstrate how the size and orientation, expansion speed, and distance since formation can be estimated. From all 10 events, FB sizes ranged from 1.1 to 9.9 R<SUB>E</SUB> average of 4.4 R<SUB>E</SUB>, and expansion speeds ranged from 139 to 377 km/s average of 257 km/s. FBs formed under a usual range of solar wind conditions between 3 and 20 R<SUB>E</SUB> upstream of Earths bow shock. We also report on new features of FBs: deep and localized magnetic \"holes\" within the cores of FBs, where the total field strength drops to &lt;1 nT.", "title": "Microscopic, Multipoint Characterization of Foreshock Bubbles With Magnetospheric Multiscale (MMS)"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4790444X", "abstract": "Black carbon BC not only warms the atmosphere but also affects human health. The nationwide lockdown due to the Coronavirus Disease 2019 COVID-19 pandemic led to a major reduction in human activity during the past 30 years. Here, the concentration of BC in the urban, urban-industry, suburb, and rural areas of a megacity Hangzhou were monitored using a multiwavelength Aethalometer to estimate the impact of the COVID-19 lockdown on BC emissions. The citywide BC decreased by 44% from 2.30 to 1.29 \u03bcg/m<SUP>3</SUP> following the COVID-19 lockdown period. The source apportionment based on the Aethalometer model shows that vehicle emission reduction responded to BC decline in the urban area and biomass burning in rural areas around the megacity had a regional contribution of BC. We highlight that the emission controls of vehicles in urban areas and biomass burning in rural areas should be more efficient in reducing BC in the megacity Hangzhou.", "title": "Variation in Concentration and Sources of Black Carbon in a Megacity of China During the COVID-19 Pandemic"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786926C", "abstract": "We use time series of time-variable gravity from the Gravitational Recovery and Climate Experiment GRACE and GRACE Follow-On GRACE-FO missions to evaluate the mass balance of the worlds glaciers and ice caps GIC for the time period April 2002 to September 2019, excluding Antarctica and Greenland peripheral glaciers. We demonstrate continuity of the mass balance record across the GRACE/GRACE-FO data gap using independent data from the GMAO Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and Applications, Version 2 MERRA-2 reanalysis. We report an average mass loss of 281.5 \u00b1 30 Gt/yr, an acceleration of 50 \u00b1 20 Gt/yr per decade, and a 13-mm cumulative sea level rise for the analyzed period. Seven regions dominate the mass loss, with the largest share from the Arctic: Alaska 72.5 \u00b1 8 Gt/yr, Canadian Arctic Archipelago 73.0 \u00b1 9 Gt/yr, Southern Andes 30.4 \u00b1 13 Gt/yr, High Mountain Asia HMA 28.8 \u00b1 11 Gt/yr, Russian Arctic 20.2 \u00b1 6 Gt/yr, Iceland 15.9 \u00b1 4 Gt/yr, and Svalbard 12.1 \u00b1 4 Gt/yr. At the regional level, the analysis of acceleration is complicated by a strong interannual to decadal variability in mass balance that is well reproduced by the GRACE-calibrated MERRA-2 data.", "title": "Continuity of the Mass Loss of the World's Glaciers and Ice Caps From the GRACE and GRACE Follow-On Missions"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786288S", "abstract": "Submicron aerosol PM<SUB>1</SUB> species measured by aerosol mass spectrometers have been widely used to validate chemical transport models; however, the uncertainties due to chemical differences between PM<SUB>1</SUB> and PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> are poorly constrained. Here we characterized such differences in a highly polluted environment in north China in winter. Our results showed that the changes in PM<SUB>1</SUB>/PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> ratios as a function of relative humidity RH were largely different for primary and secondary species. Secondary organic and inorganic aerosol SOA and SIA presented clear decreases in PM<SUB>1</SUB>/PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> ratios at RH &gt; 60% during periods with high SIA contributions &gt;50%, likely driven by the changes in aerosol hygroscopicity and phase states, while the traffic and coal combustion OA had limited dependence on RH. Thermodynamic modeling showed negligible impacts of PM differences on predictions of particle acidity, yet these impacts can cause a difference in aerosol water content by up to 50-70%.", "title": "Chemical Differences Between PM<SUB>1</SUB> and PM<SUB>2.5</SUB> in Highly Polluted Environment and Implications in Air Pollution Studies"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4789252M", "abstract": "Efforts to stem the spread of COVID-19 in China hinged on severe restrictions to human movement starting 23 January 2020 in Wuhan and subsequently to other provinces. Here, we quantify the ancillary impacts on air pollution and human health using inverse emissions estimates based on multiple satellite observations. We find that Chinese NOx emissions were reduced by 36% from early January to mid-February, with more than 80% of reductions occurring after their respective lockdown in most provinces. The reduced precursor emissions increased surface ozone by up to 16 ppb over northern China but decreased PM2.5 by up to 23 \u03bcg m<SUP>-3</SUP> nationwide. Changes in human exposure are associated with about 2,100 more ozone-related and at least 60,000 fewer PM2.5-related morbidity incidences, primarily from asthma cases, thereby augmenting efforts to reduce hospital admissions and alleviate negative impacts from potential delayed treatments.", "title": "Air Quality Response in China Linked to the 2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Lockdown"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12530526P", "abstract": "Our knowledge about synoptic-scale variations of atmospheric-CO<SUB>2</SUB> produced by interactions between midlatitude cyclones and regional-scale surface fluxes remains limited due to the scarcity of observations. We synthesized observations of greenhouse gases GHGs with respect to frontal passages to understand how GHG distributions change vertically and horizontally during a synoptic event. We use the airborne in situ measurements of GHGs collected during the Atmospheric Carbon and Transport-America summer 2016 field campaign. Using these measurements, we defined three metrics, 1 the differences in the GHG mole fractions across frontal boundaries in the atmospheric boundary layer BL and free troposphere FT, 2 differences in the vertical contrasts in GHGs in warm and cold sectors, and 3 the size and magnitude of enhanced CO<SUB>2</SUB> in the vicinity of frontal boundary. We found that frontal structures are clearly associated with spatially coherent and significant changes in GHG composition. Warm sector CO<SUB>2</SUB> mole fractions [CO<SUB>2</SUB>] are higher than those in the cold sector. The cross-frontal [CO<SUB>2</SUB>] contrasts are largest in the BL 5-30 ppm with smaller differences in the FT 3-5 ppm. We found higher [CH<SUB>4</SUB>] in the BL in the warm sector than in the cold sector for 5 out of 11 cases. Analyses of vertical profiles revealed higher [CO<SUB>2</SUB>] in the FT than in the BL in the cold sector while opposite pattern in the warm sector. Average BL-to-FT [CO<SUB>2</SUB>] differences are 12 and -6 ppm in the warm and cold sectors, respectively. The observational analyses presented define new metrics involving horizontal and vertical GHG contrasts across fronts during summer which will be used to evaluate simulations of GHG transport.", "title": "Observations of Greenhouse Gas Changes Across Summer Frontal Boundaries in the Eastern United States"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532345A", "abstract": "Major sudden stratospheric warmings SSWs, vortex formation, and final breakdown dates are key highlight points of the stratospheric polar vortex. These phenomena are relevant for stratosphere-troposphere coupling, which explains the interest in understanding their future changes. However, up to now, there is not a clear consensus on which projected changes to the polar vortex are robust, particularly in the Northern Hemisphere, possibly due to short data record or relatively moderate CO<SUB>2</SUB> forcing. The new simulations performed under the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, Phase 6, together with the long daily data requirements of the DynVarMIP project in preindustrial and quadrupled CO<SUB>2</SUB> 4xCO<SUB>2</SUB> forcing simulations provide a new opportunity to revisit this topic by overcoming the limitations mentioned above. In this study, we analyze this new model output to document the change, if any, in the frequency of SSWs under 4xCO<SUB>2</SUB> forcing. Our analysis reveals a large disagreement across the models as to the sign of this change, even though most models show a statistically significant change. As for the near-surface response to SSWs, the models, however, are in good agreement as to this signal over the North Atlantic: There is no indication of a change under 4xCO<SUB>2</SUB> forcing. Over the Pacific, however, the change is more uncertain, with some indication that there will be a larger mean response. Finally, the models show robust changes to the seasonal cycle in the stratosphere. Specifically, we find a longer duration of the stratospheric polar vortex and thus a longer season of stratosphere-troposphere coupling.", "title": "Uncertainty in the Response of Sudden Stratospheric Warmings and Stratosphere-Troposphere Coupling to Quadrupled CO<SUB>2</SUB> Concentrations in CMIP6 Models"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532362R", "abstract": "The quasi-biennial oscillation QBO of the zonal mean zonal wind is the primary mode of variability in the tropical lower stratosphere. The QBO is characterized by alternating easterly westerly shear layers that descend down from \u223c10 to 100 hPa. The QBO is also seen in lower stratospheric tropical temperature, water vapor, and ozone and affects tropospheric variability through various teleconnections. We examine here the progress in simulating the QBO in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project CMIP models, more specifically in CMIP3, CMIP5, and CMIP6 models. We show that the number of models that are able to simulate the QBO has increased from 0 in CMIP3, to 5 in CMIP5, to 15 in CMIP6. While the number of models with an internally generated QBO has tripled from CMIP5 to CMIP6, the fidelity of the simulation averaged over the CMIP models has not improved. We show that CMIP5 and CMIP6 models represent the QBO period and latitudinal extent quite well; however the QBO amplitude is shifted upwards relative to observations resulting in large underestimation of QBO amplitude at all levels below 20 hPa. The underestimation of QBO amplitude in the lowermost stratosphere and lack of variations downward to the tropopause and below will likely impact the quality of teleconnections seen in the current generation Earth system models.", "title": "Progress in Simulating the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation in CMIP Models"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532263D", "abstract": "We present the second update to a data set of gridded land-based temperature and precipitation extremes indices: HadEX3. This consists of 17 temperature and 12 precipitation indices derived from daily, in situ observations and recommended by the World Meteorological Organization WMO Expert Team on Climate Change Detection and Indices ETCCDI. These indices have been calculated at around 7,000 locations for temperature and 17,000 for precipitation. The annual and monthly indices have been interpolated on a 1.875\u00b0\u00d71.25\u00b0 longitude-latitude grid, covering 1901-2018. We show changes in these indices by examining \"global\"-average time series in comparison with previous observational data sets and also estimating the uncertainty resulting from the nonuniform distribution of meteorological stations. Both the short and long time scale behavior of HadEX3 agrees well with existing products. Changes in the temperature indices are widespread and consistent with global-scale warming. The extremes related to daily minimum temperatures are changing faster than the maximum. Spatial changes in the linear trends of precipitation indices over 1950-2018 are less spatially coherent than those for temperature indices. Globally, there are more heavy precipitation events that are also more intense and contribute a greater fraction to the total. Some of the indices use a reference period for calculating exceedance thresholds. We present a comparison between using 1961-1990 and 1981-2010. The differences between the time series of the temperature indices observed over longer time scales are shown to be the result of the interaction of the reference period with a warming climate. The gridded netCDF files and, where possible, underlying station indices are available from <A href=\"http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs/hadex3\">www.metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs/hadex3</A> and <A href=\"http://www.climdex.org\">www.climdex.org</A>.", "title": "Development of an Updated Global Land In Situ-Based Data Set of Temperature and Precipitation Extremes: HadEX3"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.169..216A", "abstract": "Accurate modeling of ionospheric total electron content TEC is an important aspect for mitigating the threats of trans-ionospheric delay error in satellite communication, earth observation, space-based navigation, timing applications as well as space weather forecasting services. In recent years, singular spectrum analysis SSA has been proved to be a powerful technique giving a relatively accurate estimate in time-series analysis comparable to the contemporary methods. In the current study, the SSA has been implemented on the GPS-derived TEC during the low solar activity year of 2017 over Nepal region which locates itself almost in the vicinity of low-latitudes being sandwiched between India and Tibet, China. The country foresees an explicit investigation and modeling of ionospheric TEC variations and corresponding delay error to precisely accomplish the space-based trans-ionospheric applications. The semi-annual variability of TEC with higher magnitudes during equinoctial seasons and lower values during solstice seasons is clearly noticed in the diurnal plots which are further substantiated by the trajectory matrix of time-series. The decomposed modes in the principal component analysis PCA signifies diurnal first, semidiurnal second, semiannual third, monthly fourth with higher orders representing associated noise errors in the signals. Correlation coefficients CC between the reconstructed and observed time-series demonstrates the SSA method could be a successful tool for forecasting the TEC series over the region. The results are compared with empirical global ionospheric maps GIMs and IRI-Plas 2017 models during different seasons, emphasizing the suitability of SSA technique for relatively better precise TEC forecasting over the region.", "title": "Singular spectrum analysis of GPS derived ionospheric TEC variations over Nepal during the low solar activity period"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.169..216A", "abstract": "Accurate modeling of ionospheric total electron content TEC is an important aspect for mitigating the threats of trans-ionospheric delay error in satellite communication, earth observation, space-based navigation, timing applications as well as space weather forecasting services. In recent years, singular spectrum analysis SSA has been proved to be a powerful technique giving a relatively accurate estimate in time-series analysis comparable to the contemporary methods. In the current study, the SSA has been implemented on the GPS-derived TEC during the low solar activity year of 2017 over Nepal region which locates itself almost in the vicinity of low-latitudes being sandwiched between India and Tibet, China. The country foresees an explicit investigation and modeling of ionospheric TEC variations and corresponding delay error to precisely accomplish the space-based trans-ionospheric applications. The semi-annual variability of TEC with higher magnitudes during equinoctial seasons and lower values during solstice seasons is clearly noticed in the diurnal plots which are further substantiated by the trajectory matrix of time-series. The decomposed modes in the principal component analysis PCA signifies diurnal first, semidiurnal second, semiannual third, monthly fourth with higher orders representing associated noise errors in the signals. Correlation coefficients CC between the reconstructed and observed time-series demonstrates the SSA method could be a successful tool for forecasting the TEC series over the region. The results are compared with empirical global ionospheric maps GIMs and IRI-Plas 2017 models during different seasons, emphasizing the suitability of SSA technique for relatively better precise TEC forecasting over the region.", "title": "Singular spectrum analysis of GPS derived ionospheric TEC variations over Nepal during the low solar activity period"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786075W", "abstract": "We explore the representation of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation AMOC in 27 models from the CMIP6 multimodel ensemble. Comparison with RAPID and SAMBA observations suggests that the ensemble mean represents the AMOC strength and vertical profile reasonably well. Linear trends over the entire historical period 1850-2014 are generally neutral, but many models exhibit an AMOC peak around the 1980s. Ensemble mean AMOC decline in future SSP scenarios is stronger in CMIP6 than CMIP5 models. In fact, AMOC decline in CMIP6 is surprisingly insensitive to the scenario at least up to 2060. We find an emergent relationship among a majority of models between AMOC strength and 21st century AMOC decline. Constraining this relationship with RAPID observations suggests that the AMOC might decline between 6 and 8 Sv 34-45% by 2100. A smaller group of models projects much less AMOC weakening of only up to 30%.", "title": "CMIP6 Models Predict Significant 21st Century Decline of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12530911J", "abstract": "Since its discovery in the early 1970s, the crucial role of the Madden-Julian Oscillation MJO in the global hydrological cycle and its tremendous influence on high-impact climate and weather extremes have been well recognized. The MJO also serves as a primary source of predictability for global Earth system variability on subseasonal time scales. The MJO remains poorly represented in our state-of-the-art climate and weather forecasting models, however. Moreover, despite the advances made in recent decades, theories for the MJO still disagree at a fundamental level. The problems of understanding and modeling the MJO have attracted significant interest from the research community. As a part of the AGUs Centennial collection, this article provides a review of recent progress, particularly over the last decade, in observational, modeling, and theoretical study of the MJO. A brief outlook for near-future MJO research directions is also provided.", "title": "Fifty Years of Research on the Madden-Julian Oscillation: Recent Progress, Challenges, and Perspectives"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...75C", "abstract": "The SIMBIO-SYS Spectrometer and Imaging for MPO BepiColombo Integrated Observatory SYStem is a complex instrument suite part of the scientific payload of the Mercury Planetary Orbiter for the BepiColombo mission, the last of the cornerstone missions of the European Space Agency ESA Horizon + science program.", "title": "SIMBIO-SYS: Scientific Cameras and Spectrometer for the BepiColombo Mission"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...42B", "abstract": "Non-thermal particles and high-energy radiation can play a role in the dynamical processes in star-forming regions and provide an important piece of the multiwavelength observational picture of their structure and components. Powerful stellar winds and supernovae in compact clusters of massive stars and OB associations are known to be favourable sites of high-energy particle acceleration and sources of non-thermal radiation and neutrinos. Namely, young massive stellar clusters are likely sources of the PeV petaelectronvolt regime cosmic rays CRs. They can also be responsible for the cosmic ray composition, e.g., <SUP>22</SUP>Ne/<SUP>20</SUP>Ne anomalous isotopic ratio in CRs. Efficient particle acceleration can be accompanied by super-adiabatic amplification of the fluctuating magnetic fields in the systems converting a part of kinetic power of the winds and supernovae into the magnetic energy through the CR-driven instabilities. The escape and CR propagation in the vicinity of the sources are affected by the non-linear CR feedback. These effects are expected to be important in starburst galaxies, which produce high-energy neutrinos and gamma-rays. We give a brief review of the theoretical models and observational data on high-energy particle acceleration and their radiation in star-forming regions with young stellar population.", "title": "High-Energy Particles and Radiation in Star-Forming Regions"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216..139S", "abstract": "Groundbased and spacecraft telescopic observations, combined with an intensive modeling effort, have greatly enhanced our understanding of hot giant planets and brown dwarfs over the past ten years. Although these objects are all fluid, hydrogen worlds with stratified atmospheres overlying convective interiors, they exhibit an impressive diversity of atmospheric behavior. Hot Jupiters are strongly irradiated, and a wealth of observations constrain the day-night temperature differences, circulation, and cloudiness. The intense stellar irradiation, presumed tidal locking and modest rotation leads to a novel regime of strong day-night radiative forcing. Circulation models predict large day-night temperature differences, global-scale eddies, patchy clouds, and, in most cases, a fast eastward jet at the equator\u2014equatorial superrotation. The warm Jupiters lie farther from their stars and are not generally tidally locked, so they may exhibit a wide range of rotation rates, obliquities, and orbital eccentricities, which, along with the weaker irradiation, leads to circulation patterns and observable signatures predicted to differ substantially from hot Jupiters. Brown dwarfs are typically isolated, rapidly rotating worlds; they radiate enormous energy fluxes into space and convect vigorously in their interiors. Their atmospheres exhibit patchiness in clouds and temperature on regional to global scales\u2014the result of modulation by large-scale atmospheric circulation. Despite the lack of irradiation, such circulations can be driven by interaction of the interior convection with the overlying atmosphere, as well as self-organization of patchiness due to cloud-dynamical-radiative feedbacks. Finally, irradiated brown dwarfs help to bridge the gap between these classes of objects, experiencing intense external irradiation as well as vigorous interior convection. Collectively, these diverse objects span over six orders of magnitude in intrinsic heat flux and incident stellar flux, and two orders of magnitude in rotation rate\u2014thereby placing strong constraints on how the circulation of giant planets broadly defined depend on these parameters. A hierarchy of modeling approaches have yielded major new insights into the dynamics governing these phenomena.", "title": "Atmospheric Dynamics of Hot Giant Planets and Brown Dwarfs"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216..131P", "abstract": "A clear understanding of the nature of the pre-eruptive magnetic field configurations of Coronal Mass Ejections CMEs is required for understanding and eventually predicting solar eruptions. Only two, but seemingly disparate, magnetic configurations are considered viable; namely, sheared magnetic arcades SMA and magnetic flux ropes MFR. They can form via three physical mechanisms flux emergence, flux cancellation, helicity condensation. Whether the CME culprit is an SMA or an MFR, however, has been strongly debated for thirty years. We formed an International Space Science Institute ISSI team to address and resolve this issue and report the outcome here. We review the status of the field across modeling and observations, identify the open and closed issues, compile lists of SMA and MFR observables to be tested against observations and outline research activities to close the gaps in our current understanding. We propose that the combination of multi-viewpoint multi-thermal coronal observations and multi-height vector magnetic field measurements is the optimal approach for resolving the issue conclusively. We demonstrate the approach using MHD simulations and synthetic coronal images.", "title": "Decoding the Pre-Eruptive Magnetic Field Configurations of Coronal Mass Ejections"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785885G", "abstract": "The plume composition at Enceladus contains clues about conditions and processes in the interior. We present new geochemical interpretations of Cassini mass spectrometry data from the plume gas and salt-rich ice grains. It is found that self-consistency between the data sets can be achieved with a derived range of 10<SUP>-4.6</SUP> to 10<SUP>-3.2</SUP> for the activity of CO<SUB>2</SUB> in Enceladus ocean. This range is compatible with long-term buffering by reduced or oxidized seafloor rocks containing quartz, talc, and carbonate minerals in the MgO-FeO-SiO<SUB>2</SUB>-CO<SUB>2</SUB>-H<SUB>2</SUB>O system. Reaction path modeling shows that these types of rocks can be produced from accreted CO<SUB>2</SUB>-rich fluids reacting with hydrous chondritic rocks over an intermediate regime of carbonation. These results, together with previous findings of silica and H<SUB>2</SUB> at Enceladus, support the hypothesis of a heterogeneous structure for the rocky core carbonated upper layer, serpentinized interior, which provides a geochemical gradient for habitability.", "title": "The Carbonate Geochemistry of Enceladus' Ocean"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..66.1169P", "abstract": "The rapid response capabilities of the Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory, together with the daily planning of its observing schedule, make it an ideal mission for following novae in the X-ray and UV bands, particularly during their early phases of rapid evolution and throughout the supersoft source interval. Many novae, both classical and recurrent, have been extensively monitored by Swift throughout their supersoft phase and later decline. We collect here results from observations of novae with outbursts which occurred between the start of 2006 and the end of 2017.", "title": "Neil Gehrels Swift Observatory studies of supersoft novae"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...55K", "abstract": "The isotopic dichotomy between non-carbonaceous NC and carbonaceous CC meteorites indicates that meteorite parent bodies derive from two genetically distinct reservoirs, which presumably were located inside NC and outside CC the orbit of Jupiter and remained isolated from each other for the first few million years of the solar system. Here we review the discovery of the NC-CC dichotomy and its implications for understanding the early history of the solar system, including the formation of Jupiter, the dynamics of terrestrial planet formation, and the origin and nature of Earths building blocks. The isotopic difference between the NC and CC reservoirs is probably inherited from the solar systems parental molecular cloud and has been maintained through the rapid formation of Jupiter that prevented significant exchange of material from inside NC and outside CC its orbit. The growth and/or migration of Jupiter resulted in inward scattering of CC bodies, which accounts for the co-occurrence of NC and CC bodies in the present-day asteroid belt and the delivery of presumably volatile-rich CC bodies to the growing terrestrial planets. Earths primitive mantle, at least for siderophile elements like Mo, has a mixed NC-CC composition, indicating that Earth accreted CC bodies during the final stages of its growth, perhaps through the Moon-forming giant impactor. The late-stage accretion of CC bodies to Earth is sufficient to account for the entire budget of Earths water and highly volatile species.", "title": "The Non-carbonaceous-Carbonaceous Meteorite Dichotomy"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4789547W", "abstract": "In the Antarctic ozone hole, ozone mixing ratios have been decreasing to extremely low values of 0.01-0.1 ppm in nearly all spring seasons since the late 1980s, corresponding to 95-99% local chemical loss. In contrast, Arctic ozone loss has been much more limited and mixing ratios have never before fallen below 0.5 ppm. In Arctic spring 2020, however, ozonesonde measurements in the most depleted parts of the polar vortex show a highly depleted layer, with ozone loss averaged over sondes peaking at 93% at 18 km. Typical minimum mixing ratios of 0.2 ppm were observed, with individual profiles showing values as low as 0.13 ppm 96% loss. The reason for the unprecedented chemical loss was an unusually strong, long-lasting, and cold polar vortex, showing that for individual winters the effect of the slow decline of ozone-depleting substances on ozone depletion may be counteracted by low temperatures.", "title": "Near-Complete Local Reduction of Arctic Stratospheric Ozone by Severe Chemical Loss in Spring 2020"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785141Z", "abstract": "Energetic electrons have frequently been observed in small-scale flux ropes. However, whether these energetic electrons were energized directly within the flux rope or not is unknown. In this paper, we present concrete evidence provided by the Magnetospheric Multiscale mission that a secondary flux rope provided strong acceleration for electrons expelled by the reconnection X line. We find that the energetic electron fluxes inside the ion-scale flux rope were larger than those outside the flux rope. Electrons were adiabatically accelerated by betatron and Fermi mechanisms inside the flux rope. The highest energy electrons &gt;100 keV were produced by betatron acceleration, whereas Fermi acceleration was unable to accelerate the electrons to high energy probably due to the finite distance of the acceleration region along the field-aligned direction. These results confirm the essential role of ion-scale flux ropes in producing energetic electrons.", "title": "Direct Evidence for Electron Acceleration Within Ion-Scale Flux Rope"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787250A", "abstract": "Many climate models struggle with a poor simulation of the Madden-Julian Oscillation MJO, especially its propagation across the Maritime Continent MC. This study quantitatively evaluates the robustness of MJO propagation over the MC in climate models that participated in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 CMIP5 and Phase 6 CMIP6 with a newly developed MC propagation metric. The results show that the CMIP6 models simulate MJO propagation over the MC more realistically than the CMIP5 models. Lower free-tropospheric moisture budget analysis highlights that the greater horizontal moisture advection is responsible for the enhanced MJO propagation over the MC. The increase in horizontal moisture advection in the CMIP6 models is mainly attributed to the steeper horizontal mean state moisture gradient around the MC, which is associated with the reduction of the equatorial dry bias.", "title": "MJO Propagation Across the Maritime Continent: Are CMIP6 Models Better Than CMIP5 Models?"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787965S", "abstract": "Both the Arctic and Antarctic sea ice extents SIEs from 44 coupled models in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 CMIP6 are evaluated by comparing them with observations and CMIP5 results. The CMIP6 multimodel mean can adequately reproduce the seasonal cycles of both the Arctic and Antarctic SIE. The observed Arctic September SIE declining trend -0.82 \u00b1 0.18 million km<SUP>2</SUP> per decade between 1979 and 2014 is slightly underestimated in CMIP6 models -0.70 \u00b1 0.06 million km<SUP>2</SUP> per decade. The observed weak but significant upward trend of the Antarctic SIE is not captured, which was an issue already in the CMIP5 phase. Compared with CMIP5 models, CMIP6 models have lower intermodel spreads in SIE mean values and trends, although their SIE biases are relatively larger. The CMIP6 models did not reproduce the new summer tendencies after 2000, including the faster decline of Arctic SIE and the larger interannual variability in Antarctic SIE.", "title": "Assessment of Sea Ice Extent in CMIP6 With Comparison to Observations and CMIP5"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788615W", "abstract": "During austral spring of 2019, an extreme positive Indian Ocean Dipole pIOD event occurred, with cold sea surface temperature SST anomalies over the eastern equatorial Indian Ocean EEIO and warming in the west. Although the growth of the EEIO cold anomalies involves forcing by equatorial nonlinear advection, unique to the 2019 pIOD is an air-sea heat flux that was a forcing to the EEIO cold anomalies, rather than a damping as in previous extreme events. This unique thermodynamic forcing is due to a large latent cooling, which is supported by an unusually strong wind speed contributed by a large southerly anomaly as part of a long-term trend. The wind trend is underpinned by a mean state SST change featuring slower warming off Sumatra-Java. Given that a similar SST trend pattern is projected under greenhouse warming, the likelihood of such thermodynamical forcing operating more frequently in the future needs to be considered.", "title": "A Unique Feature of the 2019 Extreme Positive Indian Ocean Dipole Event"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527693A", "abstract": "Jupiters ultraviolet UV aurorae, the most powerful and intense in the solar system, are caused by energetic electrons precipitating from the magnetosphere into the atmosphere where they excite the molecular hydrogen. Previous studies focused on case analyses and/or greater than 30-keV energy electrons. Here for the first time we provide a comprehensive evaluation of Jovian auroral electron characteristics over the entire relevant range of energies ~100 eV to ~1 MeV. The focus is on the first eight perijoves providing a coarse but complete System III view of the northern and southern auroral regions with corresponding UV observations. The latest magnetic field model JRM09 with a current sheet model is used to map Junos magnetic foot point onto the UV images and relate the electron measurements to the UV features. We find a recurring pattern where the 3- to 30-keV electron energy flux peaks in a region just equatorward of the main emission. The region corresponds to a minimum of the electron characteristic energy &lt;10 keV. Its polarward edge corresponds to the equatorward edge of the main oval, which is mapped at M shells of ~51. A refined current sheet model will likely bring this boundary closer to the expected 20-30 R<SUB>J</SUB>. Outside that region, the &gt;100-keV electrons contribute to most &gt;~70-80% of the total downward energy flux and the characteristic energy is usually around 100 keV or higher. We examine the UV brightness per incident energy flux as a function of characteristic energy and compare it to expectations from a model.", "title": "Energy Flux and Characteristic Energy of Electrons Over Jupiter's Main Auroral Emission"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527693A", "abstract": "Jupiters ultraviolet UV aurorae, the most powerful and intense in the solar system, are caused by energetic electrons precipitating from the magnetosphere into the atmosphere where they excite the molecular hydrogen. Previous studies focused on case analyses and/or greater than 30-keV energy electrons. Here for the first time we provide a comprehensive evaluation of Jovian auroral electron characteristics over the entire relevant range of energies ~100 eV to ~1 MeV. The focus is on the first eight perijoves providing a coarse but complete System III view of the northern and southern auroral regions with corresponding UV observations. The latest magnetic field model JRM09 with a current sheet model is used to map Junos magnetic foot point onto the UV images and relate the electron measurements to the UV features. We find a recurring pattern where the 3- to 30-keV electron energy flux peaks in a region just equatorward of the main emission. The region corresponds to a minimum of the electron characteristic energy &lt;10 keV. Its polarward edge corresponds to the equatorward edge of the main oval, which is mapped at M shells of ~51. A refined current sheet model will likely bring this boundary closer to the expected 20-30 R<SUB>J</SUB>. Outside that region, the &gt;100-keV electrons contribute to most &gt;~70-80% of the total downward energy flux and the characteristic energy is usually around 100 keV or higher. We examine the UV brightness per incident energy flux as a function of characteristic energy and compare it to expectations from a model.", "title": "Energy Flux and Characteristic Energy of Electrons Over Jupiter's Main Auroral Emission"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12531057W", "abstract": "Extreme climate events in China, including its 10 main river basins, were projected under global warming of 1.5 \u00b0C-4 \u00b0C using the latest version of a regional climate model RegCM4 for dynamical downscaling, driven by the outputs of four global climate models. Firstly, evaluation indicated that the simulations satisfactorily reproduced the spatial distribution of temperature extremes and, although with lower performance, the spatial distributions of precipitation extremes were generally captured. Additionally, a better description was achieved over areas with complex terrains by using RegCM4. Next, the model was used to make projections under global warming of 1.5 \u00b0C-4 \u00b0C. Warm extremes were projected to increase, while cold events were projected to decrease, particularly in northern and western China. In addition, the number of wet days was projected to increase in the northern part of China, and to decrease in the southern part. The maximum consecutive five-day precipitation and the precipitation intensity were projected to increase significantly throughout China, while the consecutive number of dry days was projected to significantly decrease in northern and western China. The changes of atmospheric moisture content and atmospheric circulation lead to the increase of extreme precipitation. Specifically, the increases in the indices of wetness were closely correlated with the summer precipitation, wind, moisture flux convergence, and surface specific humidity, while the consecutive number of dry days was related to the change in summer moisture flux convergence and precipitation in dry seasons. Notably, the magnitude of the changes in extremes events was projected to increase as the warming target increases.", "title": "Changes in Extreme Climate Events in China Under 1.5 \u00b0C-4 \u00b0C Global Warming Targets: Projections Using an Ensemble of Regional Climate Model Simulations"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4784378E", "abstract": "The onset of the planet encircling dust event PEDE-2018 started around 1 June 2018 as observed by Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter/Mars Color Imager, peaking around 7-10 July and persisting through mid-October 2018. After the onset of the event, the upper atmosphere underwent significant changes in density and thermal structures. Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution-Neutral Gas and Ion Mass Spectrometer MAVEN NGIMS had a good opportunity to observe these changes from the first detection in the upper atmosphere and throughout the duration of the PEDE. The compositional changes included increased density at a constant altitude for CO<SUB>2</SUB> and Ar, while the O decreased from the peak throughout the decay of the bulk of the PEDE.", "title": "Structural and Compositional Changes in the Upper Atmosphere Related to the PEDE-2018 Dust Event on Mars as Observed by MAVEN NGIMS"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4784484S", "abstract": "Aeolian sand transport frequently occurs on Mars despite wind speeds rarely exceeding predicted thresholds for motion. This dissonance is problematic for understanding aeolian processes and the resulting geomorphologic responses in contemporary and ancient atmospheres. To address the apparent discrepancy between speeds required to initiate sand motion and transport observed from orbital and in situ observations, we conducted a series of wind tunnel experiments at Martian atmospheric pressures and used buoyancy as the similitude parameter to simulate the force required to initiate particle motion on Mars. Shear velocities were derived from velocity profiles corresponding to the onset of sporadic transport, which can induce downwind cascading motion. Here, we find that threshold shear velocities are slower than previously thought by a factor of 1.6 to 2.5. Measured wind speeds on Mars exceed our observed thresholds, thus offering one mechanism behind the dissonance between observations of transport below previous thresholds of motion.", "title": "Experimentally Derived Thresholds for Windblown Sand on Mars"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787464K", "abstract": "The magnitudes of river floods in Europe have been observed to change, but their alignment with changes in the spatial coverage or extent of individual floods has not been clear. We analyze flood magnitudes and extents for 3,872 hydrometric stations across Europe over the past five decades and classify each flood based on antecedent weather conditions. We find positive correlations between flood magnitudes and extents for 95% of the stations. In central Europe and the British Isles, the association of increasing trends in magnitudes and extents is due to a magnitude-extent correlation of precipitation and soil moisture along with a shift in the flood generating processes. The alignment of trends in flood magnitudes and extents highlights the increasing importance of transnational flood risk management.", "title": "Joint Trends in Flood Magnitudes and Spatial Extents Across Europe"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786955S", "abstract": "The geothermal heat flux GHF is an important boundary condition for modeling the movement of the Antarctic ice sheet but is difficult to measure systematically at a continental scale. Earlier GHF maps suffer from low resolution and possibly biased assumptions in tectonism and crustal heat generation, resulting in significant uncertainty. We present a new GHF map for Antarctica constructed by empirically relating the upper mantle structure to known GHF in the continental United States. The new map, compared with previously seismologically determined one, has improved resolution and lower uncertainties. New features in this map include high GHF in the southern Transantarctic Mountains where warmer uppermost mantle is introduced by lithospheric removal and in the Thwaites Glacier region. Additionally, a modest GHF in the central West Antarctic Rift system near the Siple Coast and an absence of large-scale regions with GHF greater than 90 mW/m<SUP>2</SUP> are found.", "title": "A Geothermal Heat Flux Map of Antarctica Empirically Constrained by Seismic Structure"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4784317S", "abstract": "A vigorous regional dust storm substantially altered both the global atmospheric thermal structure and the magnitude and spatial distribution of dust loading within the Mars atmosphere between 1 and 9 June 2018. We examine the development and decay of this storm in latitude, longitude, altitude, and time, employing observations by the Mars Climate Sounder on board the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter. Dust layer top altitudes rose from seasonal-normal values of ~40 to ~70 km. Dust lofting to high altitudes was localized between 0\u00b0 and ~60\u00b0W longitude, and between 60\u00b0N and 60\u00b0S latitude. Intensification of paired meridional overturning circulation cells within the study area is confirmed by strong nighttime dynamical heating in higher latitudes of both hemispheres. By the end of this episode, significant dust loading was present at altitudes greater than 50 km above all longitudes on Mars, and other dust lifting centers had been activated.", "title": "Rapid Expansion and Evolution of a Regional Dust Storm in the Acidalia Corridor During the Initial Growth Phase of the Martian Global Dust Storm of 2018"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787474H", "abstract": "Timely and accurate monitoring of crops is essential for food security. Here, we examine how well solar-induced chlorophyll fluorescence SIF can inform crop productivity across the United States. Based on tower-level observations and process-based modeling, we find highly linear gross primary production GPP:SIF relationships for C4 crops, while C3 crops show some saturation of GPP at high light when SIF continues to increase. C4 crops yield higher GPP:SIF ratios 30-50% primarily because SIF is most sensitive to the light reactions does not account for photorespiration. Scaling to the satellite, we compare SIF from the TROPOspheric Monitoring Instrument TROPOMI against tower-derived GPP and county-level crop statistics. Temporally, TROPOMI SIF strongly agrees with GPP observations upscaled across a corn and soybean dominated cropland R<SUP>2</SUP> = 0.89. Spatially, county-level TROPOMI SIF correlates with crop productivity R<SUP>2</SUP> = 0.72; 0.86 when accounting for planted area and C3/C4 contributions, highlighting the potential of SIF for reliable crop monitoring.", "title": "From the Ground to Space: Using Solar-Induced Chlorophyll Fluorescence to Estimate Crop Productivity"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdAtS..37..131W", "abstract": "", "title": "Advanced Radiative Transfer Modeling System (ARMS): A New-Generation Satellite Observation Operator Developed for Numerical Weather Prediction and Remote Sensing Applications"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4789788Y", "abstract": "The reduced human activities and associated decreases in aerosol emissions during the COVID-19 pandemic are expected to affect climate. Assuming emission changes during lockdown, back-to-work and post-lockdown stages of COVID-19, climate model simulations show a surface warming over continental regions of the Northern Hemisphere. In January-March, there was an anomalous warming of 0.05-0.15 K in eastern China, and the surface temperature increase was 0.04-0.07 K in Europe, eastern United States, and South Asia in March-May. The longer the emission reductions undergo, the warmer the climate would become. The emission reductions explain the observed temperature increases of 10-40% over eastern China relative to 2019. A southward shift of the ITCZ is also seen in the simulations. This study provides an insight into the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on global and regional climate and implications for immediate actions to mitigate fast global warming.", "title": "Fast Climate Responses to Aerosol Emission Reductions During the COVID-19 Pandemic"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785378H", "abstract": "Retrospectively comparing future model projections to observations provides a robust and independent test of model skill. Here we analyze the performance of climate models published between 1970 and 2007 in projecting future global mean surface temperature GMST changes. Models are compared to observations based on both the change in GMST over time and the change in GMST over the change in external forcing. The latter approach accounts for mismatches in model forcings, a potential source of error in model projections independent of the accuracy of model physics. We find that climate models published over the past five decades were skillful in predicting subsequent GMST changes, with most models examined showing warming consistent with observations, particularly when mismatches between model-projected and observationally estimated forcings were taken into account.", "title": "Evaluating the Performance of Past Climate Model Projections"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785408L", "abstract": "The increased seismic activity of the last ~10 years in Changning county of Sichuan Province comprised just small mostly M<SUB>L</SUB> &lt; 5.0 injection-induced earthquakes. The M<SUB>W</SUB> 5.7 earthquake on June 17, 2019, is the largest event ever reported there. Moment tensor of the mainshock was remarkably dominated by a compensated linear vector dipole. We resolve its fine structure showing it was a doublet, allowing approximation by a thrust- and strike-slip subevent. The mainshock nucleated as thrust faulting, which together with the largest aftershocks can be linked with previously known reverse faults, favorably oriented to regional stress field. Contrarily, the strike-slip segment of the mainshock, less favorably oriented, was probably facilitated by elevated pore pressure due to previous injections. Shallow active strike-slip faulting, not yet mapped in the region, is a new feature, important for future hazard assessment.", "title": "The 2019 M<SUB>W</SUB> 5.7 Changning Earthquake, Sichuan Basin, China: A Shallow Doublet With Different Faulting Styles"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788913D", "abstract": "Following the emergence of a novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China instituted shutdown measures starting in late January and continuing into February 2020 to arrest the spread of disease. This resulted in a sharp economic contraction unparalleled in recent Chinese history. Satellite retrievals show that nitrogen dioxide pollution declined by an unprecedented amount ~50% regionally from its expected unperturbed value, but regional-scale column aerosol loadings and cloud microphysical properties were not detectably affected. The disparate impact is tied to differential economic impacts of the shutdown, in which transportation, a disproportionate source of nitrogen oxide emissions, underwent drastic declines ~90% reductions in passenger traffic, whereas industry and power generation, responsible for &gt;90% of particulate emissions, were relatively less affected ~20% reductions in electricity and thermal power generation. A combination of anomalously warm and humid meteorological conditions and complex chemical interactions further decreased nitrogen dioxide concentrations but likely enhanced secondary aerosol formation.", "title": "Limited Regional Aerosol and Cloud Microphysical Changes Despite Unprecedented Decline in Nitrogen Oxide Pollution During the February 2020 COVID-19 Shutdown in China"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788662R", "abstract": "Future changes in tropical cyclone properties are an important component of climate change impacts and risk for many tropical and midlatitude countries. In this study we assess the performance of a multimodel ensemble of climate models, at resolutions ranging from 250 to 25 km. We use a common experimental design including both atmosphere-only and coupled simulations run over the period 1950-2050, with two tracking algorithms applied uniformly across the models. There are overall improvements in tropical cyclone frequency, spatial distribution, and intensity in models at 25 km resolution, with several of them able to represent very intense storms. Projected tropical cyclone activity by 2050 generally declines in the South Indian Ocean, while changes in other ocean basins are more uncertain and sensitive to both tracking algorithm and imposed forcings. Coupled models with smaller biases suggest a slight increase in average TC 10 m wind speeds by 2050.", "title": "Projected Future Changes in Tropical Cyclones Using the CMIP6 HighResMIP Multimodel Ensemble"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRC..12515400P", "abstract": "One of the foci of the Forum for Artic Modeling and Observational Synthesis FAMOS project is improving Arctic regional ice-ocean models and understanding of physical processes regulating variability of Arctic environmental conditions based on synthesis of observations and model results. The Beaufort Gyre, centered in the Canada Basin of the Arctic Ocean, is an ideal phenomenon and natural laboratory for application of FAMOS modeling capabilities to resolve numerous scientific questions related to the origin and variability of this climatologic freshwater reservoir and flywheel of the Arctic Ocean. The unprecedented volume of data collected in this region is nearly optimal to describe the state and changes in the Beaufort Gyre environmental system at synoptic, seasonal, and interannual time scales. The in situ and remote sensing data characterizing ocean hydrography, sea surface heights, ice drift, concentration and thickness, ocean circulation, and biogeochemistry have been used for model calibration and validation or assimilated for historic reconstructions and establishing initial conditions for numerical predictions. This special collection of studies contributes time series of the Beaufort Gyre data; new methodologies in observing, modeling, and analysis; interpretation of measurements and model output; and discussions and findings that shed light on the mechanisms regulating Beaufort Gyre dynamics as it transitions to a new state under different climate forcing.", "title": "Introduction to Special Collection on Arctic Ocean Modeling and Observational Synthesis (FAMOS) 2: Beaufort Gyre Phenomenon"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRG..12505534B", "abstract": "We test the relationship between canopy photosynthesis and reflected near-infrared radiation from vegetation across a range of functional photosynthetic pathway and capacity and structural conditions leaf area index, fraction of green and dead leaves, canopy height, reproductive stage, and leaf angle inclination, weather conditions, and years using a network of field sites from across central California. We based our analysis on direct measurements of canopy photosynthesis, with eddy covariance, and measurements of reflected near-infrared and red radiation from vegetation, with light-emitting diode sensors. And we interpreted the observed relationships between photosynthesis and reflected near-infrared radiation using simulations based on the multilayer, biophysical model, CanVeg. Measurements of reflected near-infrared radiation were highly correlated with measurements of canopy photosynthesis on half-hourly, daily, seasonal, annual, and decadal time scales across the wide range of function and structure and weather conditions. Slopes of the regression between canopy photosynthesis and reflected near-infrared radiation were greatest for the fertilized and irrigated C<SUB>4</SUB> corn crop, intermediate for the C<SUB>3</SUB> tules on nutrient-rich organic soil and nitrogen fixing alfalfa, and least for the native annual grasslands and oak savanna on nutrient-poor, mineral soils. Reflected near-infrared radiation from vegetation has several advantages over other remotely sensed vegetation indices that are used to infer canopy photosynthesis; it does not saturate at high leaf area indices, it is insensitive to the presence of dead legacy vegetation, the sensors are inexpensive, and the reflectance signal is strong. Hence, information on reflected near-infrared radiation from vegetation may have utility in monitoring carbon assimilation in carbon sequestration projects or on microsatellites orbiting Earth for precision agriculture applications.", "title": "Outgoing Near-Infrared Radiation From Vegetation Scales With Canopy Photosynthesis Across a Spectrum of Function, Structure, Physiological Capacity, and Weather"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527823E", "abstract": "The NASA Global-scale Observations of the Limb and Disk GOLD mission has flown an ultraviolet-imaging spectrograph on SES-14, a communications satellite in geostationary orbit at 47.5\u00b0W longitude. That instrument observes the Earths far ultraviolet FUV airglow at ~134-162 nm using two identical channels. The observations performed include limb scans, stellar occultations, and images of the sunlit and nightside disk from 6:10 to 00:40 universal time each day. Initial analyses reveal interesting and unexpected results as well as the potential for further studies of the Earths thermosphere-ionosphere system and its responses to solar-geomagnetic forcing and atmospheric dynamics. Thermospheric composition ratios for major constituents, O and N<SUB>2</SUB>, temperatures near 160 km, and exospheric temperatures are retrieved from the daytime observations. Molecular oxygen O<SUB>2</SUB> densities are measured using stellar occultations. At night, emission from radiative recombination in the ionospheric F region is used to quantify ionospheric density variations in the equatorial ionization anomaly EIA. Regions of depleted F region electron density are frequently evident, even during the current solar minimum. These depletions are caused by the \"plasma fountain effect\" and are associated with the instabilities, scintillations, or \"spread F\" seen in other types of observations, and GOLD makes unique observations for their study.", "title": "Initial Observations by the GOLD Mission"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527823E", "abstract": "The NASA Global-scale Observations of the Limb and Disk GOLD mission has flown an ultraviolet-imaging spectrograph on SES-14, a communications satellite in geostationary orbit at 47.5\u00b0W longitude. That instrument observes the Earths far ultraviolet FUV airglow at ~134-162 nm using two identical channels. The observations performed include limb scans, stellar occultations, and images of the sunlit and nightside disk from 6:10 to 00:40 universal time each day. Initial analyses reveal interesting and unexpected results as well as the potential for further studies of the Earths thermosphere-ionosphere system and its responses to solar-geomagnetic forcing and atmospheric dynamics. Thermospheric composition ratios for major constituents, O and N<SUB>2</SUB>, temperatures near 160 km, and exospheric temperatures are retrieved from the daytime observations. Molecular oxygen O<SUB>2</SUB> densities are measured using stellar occultations. At night, emission from radiative recombination in the ionospheric F region is used to quantify ionospheric density variations in the equatorial ionization anomaly EIA. Regions of depleted F region electron density are frequently evident, even during the current solar minimum. These depletions are caused by the \"plasma fountain effect\" and are associated with the instabilities, scintillations, or \"spread F\" seen in other types of observations, and GOLD makes unique observations for their study.", "title": "Initial Observations by the GOLD Mission"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527213L", "abstract": "Using in situ measurements and remote-sensing observations, we study a coronal mass ejection CME that left the Sun on 9 July 2013 and impacted both Mercury and Earth while the planets were in radial alignment within 3\u2218. The CME had an initial speed as measured by coronagraphs of 580 \u00b1 20 km/s, an inferred speed at Mercury of 580 \u00b1 30 km/s, and a measured maximum speed at Earth of 530 km/s, indicating that it did not decelerate substantially in the inner heliosphere. The magnetic field measurements made by MESSENGER and Wind reveal a very similar magnetic ejecta at both planets. We consider the CME expansion as measured by the ejecta duration and the decrease of the magnetic field strength between Mercury and Earth and the velocity profile measured in situ by Wind. The long-duration magnetic ejecta 20 and 42 hr at Mercury and Earth, respectively is found to be associated with a relatively slowly expanding ejecta at 1 AU, revealing that the large size of the ejecta is due to the CME itself or its expansion in the corona or innermost heliosphere and not due to a rapid expansion between Mercury at 0.45 AU and Earth at 1 AU. We also find evidence that the CME sheath is composed of compressed material accumulated before the shock formed, as well as more recently shocked material.", "title": "Evolution of a Long-Duration Coronal Mass Ejection and Its Sheath Region Between Mercury and Earth on 9-14 July 2013"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527213L", "abstract": "Using in situ measurements and remote-sensing observations, we study a coronal mass ejection CME that left the Sun on 9 July 2013 and impacted both Mercury and Earth while the planets were in radial alignment within 3\u2218. The CME had an initial speed as measured by coronagraphs of 580 \u00b1 20 km/s, an inferred speed at Mercury of 580 \u00b1 30 km/s, and a measured maximum speed at Earth of 530 km/s, indicating that it did not decelerate substantially in the inner heliosphere. The magnetic field measurements made by MESSENGER and Wind reveal a very similar magnetic ejecta at both planets. We consider the CME expansion as measured by the ejecta duration and the decrease of the magnetic field strength between Mercury and Earth and the velocity profile measured in situ by Wind. The long-duration magnetic ejecta 20 and 42 hr at Mercury and Earth, respectively is found to be associated with a relatively slowly expanding ejecta at 1 AU, revealing that the large size of the ejecta is due to the CME itself or its expansion in the corona or innermost heliosphere and not due to a rapid expansion between Mercury at 0.45 AU and Earth at 1 AU. We also find evidence that the CME sheath is composed of compressed material accumulated before the shock formed, as well as more recently shocked material.", "title": "Evolution of a Long-Duration Coronal Mass Ejection and Its Sheath Region Between Mercury and Earth on 9-14 July 2013"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRC..12516008K", "abstract": "We present a first examination of Arctic sea ice snow depth estimates from differencing satellite lidar ICESat-2 and radar CryoSat-2 freeboards. These estimates cover the period between 14 October 2018 and the end of April 2019. Snow depth is related to freeboard differences by the refractive index/bulk density of the snow layer\u2014the only free parameter in the approach. Area-averaged snow depth ranges from 9 cm on first-year ice: 5 cm, multiyear ice: 14 cm in late October to 19 cm first-year ice: 17 cm, multiyear ice: 27 cm in April; on average, this snow is thinner over FYI. Spatial patterns and gradients of snow depth estimates compare well with reconstructions using snowfall from ERA-Interim and ERA5, although snowfall from ERA5 is systematically higher. For all months, the results suggest that ~50% of the total freeboard is comprised of snow. Retrievals are within a few centimeters of snow depth data acquired by Operation IceBridge in April 2019. Sources of uncertainties associated with this freeboard-differencing approach are discussed. Further, sea ice thicknesses calculated using the retrieved snow depth and a modified climatology are contrasted. Comparatively, the snow depth and calculated ice thickness using a modified climatology are higher by ~5 cm and 0.33 m, although these differences are not uniform throughout the season. Snow accumulation was slower between October and December but increased between December and January, unlike the modified climatology, which exhibited a monotonic accumulation for all months. Future opportunities for assessment and improvement of these estimates are discussed.", "title": "Arctic Snow Depth and Sea Ice Thickness From ICESat-2 and CryoSat-2 Freeboards: A First Examination"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506176J", "abstract": "Gibbs energy representations for ices II, III, V, and VI are reported. These were constructed using new measurements of volumes at high pressure over a range of low temperatures combined with calculated vibrational energies grounded in statistical physics. The collection of representations are released within the open source SeaFreeze program, together with the Gibbs representation already known for ice Ih and water. This program allows accurate determination of thermodynamics properties phase boundaries, density, specific heat, bulk modulus, thermal expansivity, chemical potentials and seismic wave velocities over the entire range of conditions encountered in hydrospheres in our solar system 130-500 K to 2,300 MPa. These comprehensive representations allow exploration of the rich spectrum of thermodynamic behavior in the H<SUB>2</SUB>O system. Although these results are broadly applicable in science and engineering, their use is particularly relevant to habitability analysis, interior modeling, and future geophysical sounding of water-rich planetary bodies of our solar system and beyond.", "title": "Holistic Approach for Studying Planetary Hydrospheres: Gibbs Representation of Ices Thermodynamics, Elasticity, and the Water Phase Diagram to 2,300 MPa"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506176J", "abstract": "Gibbs energy representations for ices II, III, V, and VI are reported. These were constructed using new measurements of volumes at high pressure over a range of low temperatures combined with calculated vibrational energies grounded in statistical physics. The collection of representations are released within the open source SeaFreeze program, together with the Gibbs representation already known for ice Ih and water. This program allows accurate determination of thermodynamics properties phase boundaries, density, specific heat, bulk modulus, thermal expansivity, chemical potentials and seismic wave velocities over the entire range of conditions encountered in hydrospheres in our solar system 130-500 K to 2,300 MPa. These comprehensive representations allow exploration of the rich spectrum of thermodynamic behavior in the H<SUB>2</SUB>O system. Although these results are broadly applicable in science and engineering, their use is particularly relevant to habitability analysis, interior modeling, and future geophysical sounding of water-rich planetary bodies of our solar system and beyond.", "title": "Holistic Approach for Studying Planetary Hydrospheres: Gibbs Representation of Ices Thermodynamics, Elasticity, and the Water Phase Diagram to 2,300 MPa"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12531900M", "abstract": "The stability of the operational real-time clustering algorithm for the Geostationary Lightning Mapper GLM was tested by measuring how it varied, in regard to flash rates, when the various temporal and spatial limits for the clustering algorithm changed. GLM is an instrument on the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite R-series designed to map total lightning activity continuously day and night with near-uniform storm scale spatial resolution. The results were then compared to similar variations made to the algorithms used to process the Optical Transient Detector OTD and Lightning Imaging Sensor LIS data so that the science results of the three orbital optical lightning detectors GLM, LIS, and OTD can be compared. For temporal 200 to 1,000 ms and spatial 8 to 64 km variations and for storms with flash rates less than about 40 flashes per minute, the flash rates from the GLM clustering were not very sensitive to algorithm variations. One major difference between the GLM clustering methodology and those of OTD and LIS is that large groups and flashes are artificially terminated to maintain an operational product. The artificial termination of flashes and groups does not greatly change the flash rates for storms with flash rates less than about 40 flashes per minute.", "title": "Geostationary Lightning Mapper Clustering Algorithm Stability"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506230R", "abstract": "The lowermost exposure of the Murray formation in Gale crater, Mars, was interpreted as sediment deposited in an ancient lake based on data collected by the Curiosity rover. Constraining the stratigraphic extent and duration of this environment has important implications for the paleohydrology of Gale. Insights into early Martian environments and paleofluid flow velocity can be obtained from grain size in rocks. Visual inspection of grain size is not always available for rocks investigated at field sites on Mars due to limited image coverage. But grain sizes can also be estimated from the Gini Index Mean Score, a grain-size proxy that uses point-to-point chemical variations in ChemCam Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy data. New Gini Index Mean Score results indicate that the Murray formation is dominated by mudstones with grains smaller than the spatial resolution of all rover cameras. Intervals of fine to coarse sandstone also are present, some of which are verified using observations of grain size and sedimentary structures in associated images. Overall, results demonstrate that most of the Murray consists of mudstone, suggesting settling of grains from suspension in low energy depositional environments such as lakes. Some of the mudstones contain desiccation cracks indicating periods of drying with a lowering of lake water level. However, beds and lenses of cross-bedded sandstones are common at specific intervals, suggesting episodes of fluvial and possibly eolian deposition. The persistence of lacustrine deposits interspersed with fluvial deposits suggests that liquid water was sustained on the Martian surface for tens of thousands to millions of years.", "title": "Grain Size Variations in the Murray Formation: Stratigraphic Evidence for Changing Depositional Environments in Gale Crater, Mars"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506230R", "abstract": "The lowermost exposure of the Murray formation in Gale crater, Mars, was interpreted as sediment deposited in an ancient lake based on data collected by the Curiosity rover. Constraining the stratigraphic extent and duration of this environment has important implications for the paleohydrology of Gale. Insights into early Martian environments and paleofluid flow velocity can be obtained from grain size in rocks. Visual inspection of grain size is not always available for rocks investigated at field sites on Mars due to limited image coverage. But grain sizes can also be estimated from the Gini Index Mean Score, a grain-size proxy that uses point-to-point chemical variations in ChemCam Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy data. New Gini Index Mean Score results indicate that the Murray formation is dominated by mudstones with grains smaller than the spatial resolution of all rover cameras. Intervals of fine to coarse sandstone also are present, some of which are verified using observations of grain size and sedimentary structures in associated images. Overall, results demonstrate that most of the Murray consists of mudstone, suggesting settling of grains from suspension in low energy depositional environments such as lakes. Some of the mudstones contain desiccation cracks indicating periods of drying with a lowering of lake water level. However, beds and lenses of cross-bedded sandstones are common at specific intervals, suggesting episodes of fluvial and possibly eolian deposition. The persistence of lacustrine deposits interspersed with fluvial deposits suggests that liquid water was sustained on the Martian surface for tens of thousands to millions of years.", "title": "Grain Size Variations in the Murray Formation: Stratigraphic Evidence for Changing Depositional Environments in Gale Crater, Mars"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506278G", "abstract": "Mars atmospheric pressure variations induce ground displacements through elastic deformations. The various sensors of the InSight mission were designed in order to be able to understand and correct for these ground deformations induced by atmospheric effects. Particular efforts were made, on one hand, to avoid direct pressure and wind effects on the seismometer and, on the other hand, to have a high performance pressure sensor operating in the same frequency range as the seismometer. As a consequence of these technical achievements and the low background seismic noise of Mars, the InSight mission is opening a new science domain in which the ground displacements can be used to perform atmospheric science. This study presents an analysis of pressure and seismic signals and the relations between them. After a short description of the pressure and seismic sensors, we present an analysis of these signals as a function of local time at the InSight location. Then the coherent signals recorded by both pressure and seismic sensors are described and interpreted in terms of atmospheric signals and ground deformation processes. Two different methods to remove the pressure effects recorded by SEIS sensors are presented, and their efficiency is estimated and compared. These decorrelation methods allow the pressure generated noise to be reduced by a factor of 2 during the active day time period. Finally, an analysis of SEIS signals induced by gravity waves demonstrates the interest of ground displacement measurements to characterize their arrival azimuth.", "title": "Pressure Effects on the SEIS-InSight Instrument, Improvement of Seismic Records, and Characterization of Long Period Atmospheric Waves From Ground Displacements"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506278G", "abstract": "Mars atmospheric pressure variations induce ground displacements through elastic deformations. The various sensors of the InSight mission were designed in order to be able to understand and correct for these ground deformations induced by atmospheric effects. Particular efforts were made, on one hand, to avoid direct pressure and wind effects on the seismometer and, on the other hand, to have a high performance pressure sensor operating in the same frequency range as the seismometer. As a consequence of these technical achievements and the low background seismic noise of Mars, the InSight mission is opening a new science domain in which the ground displacements can be used to perform atmospheric science. This study presents an analysis of pressure and seismic signals and the relations between them. After a short description of the pressure and seismic sensors, we present an analysis of these signals as a function of local time at the InSight location. Then the coherent signals recorded by both pressure and seismic sensors are described and interpreted in terms of atmospheric signals and ground deformation processes. Two different methods to remove the pressure effects recorded by SEIS sensors are presented, and their efficiency is estimated and compared. These decorrelation methods allow the pressure generated noise to be reduced by a factor of 2 during the active day time period. Finally, an analysis of SEIS signals induced by gravity waves demonstrates the interest of ground displacement measurements to characterize their arrival azimuth.", "title": "Pressure Effects on the SEIS-InSight Instrument, Improvement of Seismic Records, and Characterization of Long Period Atmospheric Waves From Ground Displacements"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506387K", "abstract": "Measurements of ground compliance at the InSight landing site\u2014describing the surface response to pressure loading\u2014are obtained from seismic and meteorological data. Compliance observations show an increase with frequency indicating the presence of a stiffer rock layer beneath the exposed regolith. We performed a Markov chain Monte Carlo inversion to investigate the vertical profile of the elastic parameters down to 20 m below InSight. Compliance was inverted both freely and assuming prior knowledge of compaction in the regolith, and the limitations and strengths of the methods were assessed on the basis of theoretical considerations and synthetic tests. The inverted Young modulus exhibits an increase by a factor of 10-100 over the first 10-15 m, compatible with a structural discontinuity between 0.7 and 7 m. The proposed scheme can be used for joint inversion of other seismic, geological, or mechanical constraints to refine the resulting vertical section.", "title": "Subsurface Structure at the InSight Landing Site From Compliance Measurements by Seismic and Meteorological Experiments"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506387K", "abstract": "Measurements of ground compliance at the InSight landing site\u2014describing the surface response to pressure loading\u2014are obtained from seismic and meteorological data. Compliance observations show an increase with frequency indicating the presence of a stiffer rock layer beneath the exposed regolith. We performed a Markov chain Monte Carlo inversion to investigate the vertical profile of the elastic parameters down to 20 m below InSight. Compliance was inverted both freely and assuming prior knowledge of compaction in the regolith, and the limitations and strengths of the methods were assessed on the basis of theoretical considerations and synthetic tests. The inverted Young modulus exhibits an increase by a factor of 10-100 over the first 10-15 m, compatible with a structural discontinuity between 0.7 and 7 m. The proposed scheme can be used for joint inversion of other seismic, geological, or mechanical constraints to refine the resulting vertical section.", "title": "Subsurface Structure at the InSight Landing Site From Compliance Measurements by Seismic and Meteorological Experiments"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532918B", "abstract": "The Lightning Imaging Sensor LIS was launched to the International Space Station ISS in February 2017, detecting optical signatures of lightning with storm-scale horizontal resolution during both day and night. ISS LIS data are available beginning 1 March 2017. Millisecond timing allows detailed intercalibration and validation with other spaceborne and ground-based lightning sensors. Initial comparisons with those other sensors suggest flash detection efficiency around 60% diurnal variability of 51-75%, false alarm rate under 5%, timing accuracy better than 2 ms, and horizontal location accuracy around 3 km. The spatially uniform flash detection capability of ISS LIS from low-Earth orbit allows assessment of spatially varying flash detection efficiency for other sensors and networks, particularly the Geostationary Lightning Mappers. ISS LIS provides research data suitable for investigations of lightning physics, climatology, thunderstorm processes, and atmospheric composition, as well as real-time lightning data for operational forecasting and aviation weather interests. ISS LIS enables enrichment and extension of the long-term global climatology of lightning from space and is the only recent platform that extends the global record to higher latitudes \u00b155\u00b0. The global spatial distribution of lightning from ISS LIS is broadly similar to previous data sets, with globally averaged seasonal/annual flash rates about 5-10% lower. This difference is likely due to reduced flash detection efficiency that will be mitigated in future ISS LIS data processing, as well as the shorter ISS LIS period of record. The expected land/ocean contrast in the diurnal variability of global lightning is also observed.", "title": "Three Years of the Lightning Imaging Sensor Onboard the International Space Station: Expanded Global Coverage and Enhanced Applications"}, {"bibcode": "2020SoPh..295...37O", "abstract": "The opening of closed magnetic loops via reconnection with open solar flux, so called \"interchange reconnection\", is invoked in a number of models of slow solar wind release. In the heliosphere, this is expected to result in local switchbacks or inversions in heliospheric magnetic flux HMF. When observed at 1 AU, inverted HMF has previously been shown to exhibit high ion charge states, suggestive of hot coronal loops, and to map to the locations of coronal magnetic separatrices. However, simulations show that inverted HMF produced directly by reconnection in the low corona is unlikely to survive to 1 AU without the amplification by solar wind speed shear. By considering the surrounding solar wind, we show that inverted HMF is preferably associated with regions of solar wind shear at 1 AU. Compared with the surrounding solar wind, inverted HMF intervals have lower magnetic field intensity and show intermediate speed and density values between the faster, more tenuous wind ahead and the slower, denser wind behind. There is no coherent signature in iron charge states, but oxygen and carbon charge states within the inverted HMF are in agreement with the higher values in the slow wind behind. Conversely, the iron-to-oxygen abundance ratio is in better agreement with the lower values in the solar wind ahead, while the alpha-to-proton abundance ratio shows no variation. One possible explanation for these observations is that the interchange reconnection and subsequent solar wind shear that is responsible for generation of inverted HMF involves very small, quiet-Sun loops of approximately photospheric composition, which are impulsively heated in the low corona, rather than large-scale active region loops with enhanced first-ionisation potential elements. Whether signatures of such small loops could be detected in situ at 1 AU still remains to be determined.", "title": "Signatures of Coronal Loop Opening via Interchange Reconnection in the Slow Solar Wind at 1 AU"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506446S", "abstract": "Aeolian megaripples, with 5- to 50-m spacing, are abundant on the surface of Mars. These features were repeatedly targeted by high-resolution orbital images, but they have never been observed to move. Thus, aeolian megaripples especially the bright-toned ones often referred as Transverse Aeolian Ridges\u2014TARs have been interpreted as relict features of a past climate. In this report, we show evidence for the migration of bright-toned megaripples spaced 1 to 35 m 5 m on average in two equatorial areas on Mars indicating that megaripples and small TARs can be active today. The moving megaripples display sand fluxes that are 2 orders of magnitudes lower than the surrounding dunes on average and, unlike similar bedforms on Earth, can migrate obliquely and longitudinally. In addition, the active megaripples in the two study areas of Syrtis Major and Mawrth Vallis show very similar flux distributions, echoing the similarities between dune crest fluxes in the two study areas and suggesting the existence of a relationship between dune and megaripple fluxes that can be explored elsewhere. Active megaripples, together with high-sand flux dunes, represent a key indicator of strong winds at the surface of Mars. A past climate with a denser atmosphere is not necessary to explain their accumulation and migration.", "title": "Megaripple Migration on Mars"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506446S", "abstract": "Aeolian megaripples, with 5- to 50-m spacing, are abundant on the surface of Mars. These features were repeatedly targeted by high-resolution orbital images, but they have never been observed to move. Thus, aeolian megaripples especially the bright-toned ones often referred as Transverse Aeolian Ridges\u2014TARs have been interpreted as relict features of a past climate. In this report, we show evidence for the migration of bright-toned megaripples spaced 1 to 35 m 5 m on average in two equatorial areas on Mars indicating that megaripples and small TARs can be active today. The moving megaripples display sand fluxes that are 2 orders of magnitudes lower than the surrounding dunes on average and, unlike similar bedforms on Earth, can migrate obliquely and longitudinally. In addition, the active megaripples in the two study areas of Syrtis Major and Mawrth Vallis show very similar flux distributions, echoing the similarities between dune crest fluxes in the two study areas and suggesting the existence of a relationship between dune and megaripple fluxes that can be explored elsewhere. Active megaripples, together with high-sand flux dunes, represent a key indicator of strong winds at the surface of Mars. A past climate with a denser atmosphere is not necessary to explain their accumulation and migration.", "title": "Megaripple Migration on Mars"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786572D", "abstract": "The Juno spacecraft reached the mid-point of its nominal mission in December 2018, after completing 17 perijove passes. Ten of these were dedicated to the determination of the gravity field of the planet, with the aim of constraining its interior structure. We provide an update on Jupiters gravity field, its tidal response and spin axis motion over time. The analysis of the Doppler data collected during the perijove passes hints to a non-static and/or non-axially symmetric field, possibly related to several different physical mechanisms, such as normal modes or localized atmospheric or deeply-rooted dynamics.", "title": "Jupiter's Gravity Field Halfway Through the Juno Mission"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216..142F", "abstract": "The Mars 2020 mission will seek the signs of ancient life on Mars and will identify, prepare, document, and cache a set of samples for possible return to Earth by a follow-on mission. Mars 2020 and its Perseverance rover thus link and further two long-held goals in planetary science: a deep search for evidence of life in a habitable extraterrestrial environment, and the return of martian samples to Earth for analysis in terrestrial laboratories.", "title": "Mars 2020 Mission Overview"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787768L", "abstract": "An extreme positive Indian Ocean Dipole IOD event occurred in 2019 boreal autumn, which has induced severe climate impacts around the Indian Ocean basin. In this study, the cause for 2019 IOD event and the related mechanism are explored. We find that the remarkable strengthening of Australian high and weakening of sea level pressure over South China Sea/Philippine Sea have been evidently visible since May 2019. Such a record-breaking interhemispheric pressure gradient IHPG induced northward cross-equatorial flow over the western Maritime Continent, which triggered strong wind-evaporation-SST and thermocline feedbacks in 2019. In addition to 2019 case, historical IOD events are highly correlated with IHPG from boreal late spring to summer. We show that skillful IHPG prediction can be made in March by European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts seasonal forecast system, which makes it quite possible for the early warning of extreme IOD events by two to three seasons ahead.", "title": "What Caused the Extreme Indian Ocean Dipole Event in 2019?"}, {"bibcode": "2020LRCA....6....1M", "abstract": "This review aims at providing an up-to-date status and a general introduction to the subject of the numerical study of energetic particle acceleration and transport in turbulent astrophysical flows. The subject is also complemented by a short overview of recent progresses obtained in the domain of laser plasma experiments. We review the main physical processes at the heart of the production of a non-thermal distribution in both Newtonian and relativistic astrophysical flows, namely the first and second order Fermi acceleration processes. We also discuss shock drift and surfing acceleration, two processes important in the context of particle injection in shock acceleration. We analyze with some details the particle-in-cell PIC approach used to describe particle kinetics. We review the main results obtained with PIC simulations in the recent years concerning particle acceleration at shocks and in reconnection events. The review discusses the solution of Fokker-Planck problems with application to the study of particle acceleration at shocks but also in hot coronal plasmas surrounding compact objects. We continue by considering large scale physics. We describe recent developments in magnetohydrodynamic MHD simulations. We give a special emphasis on the way energetic particle dynamics can be coupled to MHD solutions either using a multi-fluid calculation or directly coupling kinetic and fluid calculations. This aspect is mandatory to investigate the acceleration of particles in the deep relativistic regimes to explain the highest cosmic ray energies.", "title": "Multi-scale simulations of particle acceleration in astrophysical systems"}, {"bibcode": "2020P&SS..18304504H", "abstract": "We investigate the abundance and properties especially, grain size of dust in galaxy halos using available observational data in the literature. There are two major sets of data. One is i the reddening curves at redshifts z \u223c 1 and 2 derived for Mg II absorbers, which are assumed to trace the medium in galaxy halos. The other is ii the cosmic extinction up to z \u223c 2 mainly traced by distant background quasars. For i, the observed reddening curves favor a grain radius of a \u223c 0.03 \u03bc m for silicate, while graphite is not supported because of its strong 2175 \u00c5 bump. Using amorphous carbon improves the fit to the reddening curves compared with graphite if the grain radius is a\u2272 0.03 \u03bc m. For ii, the cosmic extinction requires \u03b7\u227310<SUP>-2</SUP> \u03b7 is the ratio of the halo dust mass to the stellar mass; the observationally suggested value is \u03b7 \u223c10<SUP>-3</SUP> for silicate if a \u223c 0.03 \u03bc m as suggested by the reddening curve constraint. Thus, for silicate, we do not find any grain radius that satisfies both i and ii unless the halo dust abundance is much larger than suggested by the observations. For amorphous carbon, in contrast, a wide range of grain radius a \u223c 0.01 -0.3 \u03bcm is accepted by the cosmic extinction; thus, we find that a grain radius range of a \u223c 0.01 -0.03 \u03bcm is supported by combining i and ii. We also discuss the origin of dust in galaxy halos, focusing on the importance of grain size in the physical mechanism of dust supply to galaxy halos.", "title": "Dust abundance and grain size in galaxy halos"}, {"bibcode": "2020Ap&SS.365...51D", "abstract": "We searched for a resolution of the flat galactic rotation curve problem from geometry instead of assuming the existence of dark matter. We observed that the scale independence of the rotational velocity in the outer region of galaxies could point out to a possible existence of local scale symmetry and therefore the gravitational phenomena inside such regions should be described by the unique local scale symmetric theory, namely Weyls theory of gravity. We solved field equations of Weyl gravity and determined the special geometry in the outer region of galaxies. In order to understand the effective description of gravitational phenomena, we compared individual terms of so called Einstein-Weyl theory and concluded that while the outer region of galaxies are described by the Weyl term, the inner region of galaxies are described by the Einstein-Hilbert term.", "title": "Flat galactic rotation curves from geometry in Weyl gravity"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...82B", "abstract": "Spectral retrieval has long been a powerful tool for interpreting planetary remote sensing observations. Flexible, parameterised, agnostic models are coupled with inversion algorithms in order to infer atmospheric properties directly from observations, with minimal reliance on physical assumptions. This approach, originally developed for application to Earth satellite data and subsequently observations of other Solar System planets, has been recently and successfully applied to transit, eclipse and phase curve spectra of transiting exoplanets. In this review, we present the current state-of-the-art in terms of our ability to accurately retrieve information about atmospheric chemistry, temperature, clouds and spatial variability; we discuss the limitations of this, both in the available data and modelling strategies used; and we recommend approaches for future improvement.", "title": "Outstanding Challenges of Exoplanet Atmospheric Retrievals"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...84K", "abstract": "The nature and structure of the observed east-west flows on Jupiter and Saturn have been a long-standing mystery in planetary science. This mystery has been recently unraveled by the accurate gravity measurements provided by the Juno mission to Jupiter and the Grand Finale of the Cassini mission to Saturn. These two experiments, which coincidentally happened around the same time, allowed the determination of the overall vertical and meridional profiles of the zonal flows on both planets. This paper reviews the topic of zonal jets on the gas giants in light of the new data from these two experiments. The gravity measurements not only allow the depth of the jets to be constrained, yielding the inference that the jets extend to roughly 3000 and 9000 km below the observed clouds on Jupiter and Saturn, respectively, but also provide insights into the mechanisms controlling these zonal flows. Specifically, for both planets this depth corresponds to the depth where electrical conductivity is within an order of magnitude of 1 S m<SUP>-1</SUP>, implying that the magnetic field likely plays a key role in damping the zonal flows. An intrinsic characteristic of any gravity inversion, as discussed here, is that the solutions might not be unique. We analyze the robustness of the solutions and present several independent lines of evidence supporting the results presented here.", "title": "Comparison of the Deep Atmospheric Dynamics of Jupiter and Saturn in Light of the Juno and Cassini Gravity Measurements"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...76B", "abstract": "Molecular clouds are a fundamental ingredient of galaxies: they are the channels that transform the diffuse gas into stars. The detailed process of how they do it is not completely understood. We review the current knowledge of molecular clouds and their substructure from scales \u223c1 kpc down to the filament and core scale. We first review the mechanisms of cloud formation from the warm diffuse interstellar medium down to the cold and dense molecular clouds, the process of molecule formation and the role of the thermal and gravitational instabilities. We also discuss the main physical mechanisms through which clouds gather their mass, and note that all of them may have a role at various stages of the process. In order to understand the dynamics of clouds we then give a critical review of the widely used virial theorem, and its relation to the measurable properties of molecular clouds. Since these properties are the tools we have for understanding the dynamical state of clouds, we critically analyse them. We finally discuss the ubiquitous filamentary structure of molecular clouds and its connection to prestellar cores and star formation.", "title": "From Diffuse Gas to Dense Molecular Cloud Cores"}, {"bibcode": "2020JPCom...1a5002T", "abstract": "Simplicial complexes constitute the underlying topology of interacting complex systems including among the others brain and social interaction networks. They are generalized network structures that allow to go beyond the framework of pairwise interactions and to capture the many-body interactions between two or more nodes strongly affecting dynamical processes. In fact, the simplicial complexes topology allows to assign a dynamical variable not only to the nodes of the interacting complex systems but also to links, triangles, and so on. Here we show evidence that the dynamics defined on simplices of different dimensions can be significantly different even if we compare dynamics of simplices belonging to the same simplicial complex. By investigating the spectral properties of the simplicial complex model called network geometry with flavor NGF we provide evidence that the up and down higher-order Laplacians can have a finite spectral dimension whose value depends on the order of the Laplacian. Finally we discuss the implications of this result for higher-order diffusion defined on simplicial complexes showing that the n-order diffusion dynamics have a return type distribution that can depends on n as it is observed in NGFs.", "title": "Simplicial complexes: higher-order spectral dimension and dynamics"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdSpR..66.1147D", "abstract": "Novae are the observable outcome of a transient thermonuclear runaway on the surface of an accreting white dwarf in a close binary system. Their high peak luminosity renders them visible in galaxies out beyond the distance of the Virgo Cluster. Over the past century, surveys of extragalactic novae, particularly within the nearby Andromeda Galaxy, have yielded substantial insights regarding the properties of their populations and sub-populations. The recent decade has seen the first detailed panchromatic studies of individual extragalactic novae and the discovery of two probably related sub-groups: the faint-fast and the rapid recurrent novae. In this review we summarise the past 100 years of extragalactic efforts, introduce the rapid recurrent sub-group, and look in detail at the remarkable faint-fast, and rapid recurrent, nova M31N 2008-12a. We end with a brief look forward, not to the next 100 years, but the next few decades, and the study of novae in the upcoming era of wide-field and multi-messenger time-domain surveys.", "title": "On a century of extragalactic novae and the rise of the rapid recurrent novae"}, {"bibcode": "2020SpWea..1802109D", "abstract": "Rossby waves arise in thin layers within fluid regions of stars and planets. These global wave-like patterns occur due to the variation in Coriolis forces with latitude. In the past several years observational evidence has indicated that there are also Rossby waves in the Sun. Although Rossby waves have been detected in the Suns photosphere and corona, they most likely originate in the solar tachocline, the sharp shear layer at the base of the solar convection zone, where the differential rotation driven by convection transitions to the solidly rotating radiative interior. These waves differ from their Earths counterparts by being strongly modified by toroidal magnetic fields in the solar tachocline. Recent simulations of magnetohydrodynamics of tachocline Rossby waves and magnetic fields are demonstrated to produce strong \"tachocline nonlinear oscillations,\" which have periods similar to those observed in the solar atmosphere\u2014enhanced periods of solar activity, or \"seasons\"\u2014occurring at intervals between six months and two years. These seasonal/subseasonal bursts produce the strongest eruptive space weather events. Thus, a key to forecasting the timing, amplitude, and location of future activity bursts, and hence space weather events, could lie in our ability to forecast the phase and amplitude of Rossby waves and associated tachocline nonlinear oscillations. Accurately forecasting the properties of solar Rossby waves and their impact on space weather will require linking surface activity observations to the magnetohydrodynamics of tachocline Rossby waves, using modern data assimilation techniques. Both short-term hours to days and long-term decadal to millennial forecasts of space weather and climate are now being made. We highlight in this article the potential of solar Rossby waves for forecasting space weather on intermediate time scales, of several weeks to months up to a few years ahead.", "title": "Space Weather Challenge and Forecasting Implications of Rossby Waves"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506323R", "abstract": "The finding by the OSIRIS-REx Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, and Security-Regolith Explorer mission that its target 101955 Bennu is an active asteroid has raised questions as to whether the observed particle ejection events are driven by temperature. To investigate sublimation of water ice and rock thermal fracture as possible temperature-driven causes, we modeled the global temperatures of Bennu and searched for correlations with the identified ejection points on the asteroid surface. We computed temperatures with the Advanced Thermophysical Model and the 75-cm-resolution global shape model of Bennu derived by the OSIRIS-REx mission. We find that ~1,856 m<SUP>2</SUP> of Bennus polar regions have orbit-averaged temperatures that are sufficiently cold to enable water ice, if buried within the top few meters of the surface, to remain stable over geological timescales. Millimeter thick layers of surface water ice are also stable over ~10<SUP>3</SUP>-year timescales within polar centimeter-scale cold traps. However, we do not find evidence of conditions enabling ice stability in the warmer equatorial regions, where ejection events have been observed, implying that sublimation of water ice is not the cause of particle ejection. Conversely, rock thermal fracture remains a possible mechanism of particle ejection. We find high amplitudes of diurnal temperature variation, a proxy for the efficacy of thermal fracturing, at all latitudes on Bennu due to its extreme ruggedness. Therefore, if rock thermal fracture is the mechanism, particles could be ejected from any latitude, which is consistent with the continued observations of particle ejection by OSIRIS-REx.", "title": "Implications for Ice Stability and Particle Ejection From High-Resolution Temperature Modeling of Asteroid (101955) Bennu"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506323R", "abstract": "The finding by the OSIRIS-REx Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, and Security-Regolith Explorer mission that its target 101955 Bennu is an active asteroid has raised questions as to whether the observed particle ejection events are driven by temperature. To investigate sublimation of water ice and rock thermal fracture as possible temperature-driven causes, we modeled the global temperatures of Bennu and searched for correlations with the identified ejection points on the asteroid surface. We computed temperatures with the Advanced Thermophysical Model and the 75-cm-resolution global shape model of Bennu derived by the OSIRIS-REx mission. We find that ~1,856 m<SUP>2</SUP> of Bennus polar regions have orbit-averaged temperatures that are sufficiently cold to enable water ice, if buried within the top few meters of the surface, to remain stable over geological timescales. Millimeter thick layers of surface water ice are also stable over ~10<SUP>3</SUP>-year timescales within polar centimeter-scale cold traps. However, we do not find evidence of conditions enabling ice stability in the warmer equatorial regions, where ejection events have been observed, implying that sublimation of water ice is not the cause of particle ejection. Conversely, rock thermal fracture remains a possible mechanism of particle ejection. We find high amplitudes of diurnal temperature variation, a proxy for the efficacy of thermal fracturing, at all latitudes on Bennu due to its extreme ruggedness. Therefore, if rock thermal fracture is the mechanism, particles could be ejected from any latitude, which is consistent with the continued observations of particle ejection by OSIRIS-REx.", "title": "Implications for Ice Stability and Particle Ejection From High-Resolution Temperature Modeling of Asteroid (101955) Bennu"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786313O", "abstract": "Observations from the recently launched Global-Scale Observations of the Limb and Disk GOLD instrument on the geostationary SES-14 communications satellite reveal a substantial response of the mean state of the thermosphere to the Sudden Stratospheric Warming SSW event in early January 2019. The observed O/N<SUB>2</SUB> column density depletion of more than 10% starts at the onset of the SSW, maximizes at the time of the stratospheric wind reversal, and recovers toward the end of the SSW. A connection between SSW and thermospheric composition was previously predicted by model simulations but could not be observed before. The GOLD measurements support the scenario that enhanced global-scale wave activity during SSWs causes an enhanced wave driving of the lower thermosphere zonal mean circulation that leads to a reduction in lower thermosphere atomic oxygen, which then propagates through molecular diffusion into the upper thermosphere.", "title": "Thermospheric Composition O/N<SUB>2</SUB> Response to an Altered Meridional Mean Circulation During Sudden Stratospheric Warmings Observed by GOLD"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRF..12505318V", "abstract": "The response of the Greenland Ice Sheet GrIS to a warmer climate is uncertain on long time scales. Climate models, such as those participating in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project phase 6 CMIP6, are used to assess this uncertainty. The Community Earth System Model version 2.1 CESM2 is a CMIP6 model capable of running climate simulations with either one-way coupling fixed ice sheet geometry or two-way coupling dynamic geometry to the GrIS. The model features prognostic snow albedo, online downscaling using elevation classes, and a firn pack to refreeze percolating melt water. Here we evaluate the representation of the GrIS surface energy balance and surface mass balance in CESM2 at 1\u00b0 resolution with fixed GrIS geometry. CESM2 agrees closely with ERA-Interim reanalysis data for key controls on GrIS SMB: surface pressure, sea ice extent, 500 hPa geopotential height, wind speed, and 700 hPa air temperature. Cloudsat-CALIPSO data show that supercooled liquid-containing clouds are adequately represented, whereas comparisons to Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer and CM SAF Cloud, Albedo, and Surface Radiation data set from Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer data second edition data suggest that CESM2 underestimates surface albedo. The seasonal cycle and spatial patterns of surface energy balance and surface mass balance components in CESM2 agree well with regional climate model RACMO2.3p2, with GrIS-integrated melt, refreezing, and runoff bracketed by RACMO2 counterparts at 11 and 1 km. Time series of melt, runoff, and SMB show a break point around 1990, similar to RACMO2. These results suggest that GrIS SMB is realistic in CESM2, which adds confidence to coupled ice sheet-climate experiments that aim to assess the GrIS contribution to future sea level rise.", "title": "Present-Day Greenland Ice Sheet Climate and Surface Mass Balance in CESM2"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRB..12517737F", "abstract": "In recent years, numerous small earthquakes have occurred near the town of Pecos in West Texas; however, when this activity began and whether it was caused by increased petroleum industry activity has been uncertain because prior to 2017 there were few permanent seismograph stations in the region. We identify and locate earthquakes using data recorded since 2000 at TXAR, a sensitive 10-station seismic array situated about 240 km south of Pecos. We thus show that in 2007, one earthquake occurred near Pecos, in 2009 several more occurred, and subsequently, activity has increased considerably, with more than 2000 events identified in 2017. A time-of-day and year-by-year analysis identifies geographic areas in West Texas where events are likely to be natural earthquakes and quarry blasts. However, for the Pecos events, annual seismicity rates increase along with annual volumes of petroleum production and fluid waste disposal, suggesting a causal link. Analysis of seismograms collected by the EarthScope Transportable Array indicates that the 2009 earthquakes had focal depths of 4.0-5.2 km below sea level, within or just below strata where petroleum is produced and/or wastewater is injected. The largest earthquake to date had magnitude M<SUB>L</SUB>3.7, but the recent high activity rates suggest that greater magnitudes may be possible. For the years 2000-2017, we provide a catalog of 10,753 epicenters of seismic events recorded at TXAR.", "title": "Onset and Cause of Increased Seismic Activity Near Pecos, West Texas, United States, From Observations at the Lajitas TXAR Seismic Array"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532237W", "abstract": "The bulk microphysical properties and number distribution functions ND of supercooled liquid water SLW and ice inside and between ubiquitous generating cells GCs observed over the Southern Ocean SO during the Southern Ocean Clouds Radiation Aerosol Transport Experimental Study SOCRATES measured by in situ cloud probes onboard the NCAR/NSF G-V aircraft are compared. SLW was detected inside all GCs with an average liquid water content of 0.31 \u00b1 0.19 g m<SUP>-3</SUP>, 11% larger than values between GCs. The ND of droplets maximum dimension D &lt; 50 \u03bcm inside and between GCs had only slight differences. For ice particles, on the other hand, the mean concentration median mass diameter with D &gt; 200 \u03bcm inside GCs was 2.0 \u00b1 3.3 L<SUP>-1</SUP> 323 \u00b1 263 \u03bcm, 65% 37% larger than values outside GCs. As D increases, the percentage differences became larger up to ~500%. The more and larger ice particles inside GCs suggest the GC updrafts provide a favorable environment for particle growth by deposition and riming and that mixing processes are less efficient at redistributing larger particles. The horizontal scale of observed GCs ranged from 200 to 600 m with a mean of 395 \u00b1 162 m, smaller than GC widths observed in previous studies. This study expands knowledge of the microphysical properties and processes acting in GCs over a wider range of conditions than previously available.", "title": "Microphysical Properties of Generating Cells Over the Southern Ocean: Results From SOCRATES"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785842K", "abstract": "A new dense and widely distributed tsunami observation network installed off northeast Japan detected millimeter-scale tsunamis from an Mw 6.0 shallow interplate earthquake on 20 August 2016. Based on the fault model deduced from this data set, we obtained a stress drop of 1.5 MPa for this event, similar to those associated with typical interplate earthquakes. The rupture area was unlikely to overlap with regions where slow earthquakes occur, such as low-frequency-tremors and very-low-frequency-earthquakes. The results demonstrated that this new network has dramatically increased the detectability of millimeter-scale tsunamis. Some near-source stations were contaminated by large pressure offset signals irrelevant to tsunami, and we must therefore be careful when analyzing these data. Nonetheless, the new array enables estimations of the stress drops of moderate offshore earthquakes and can be used to elucidate the spatial variation of mechanical properties along the plate interface with much higher resolution than previously possible.", "title": "Millimeter-Scale Tsunami Detected by a Wide and Dense Observation Array in the Deep Ocean: Fault Modeling of an Mw 6.0 Interplate Earthquake off Sanriku, NE Japan"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787492H", "abstract": "Future greenhouse warming is expected to influence the characteristics of global monsoon systems. However, large regional uncertainties still remain. Here we use 16 Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 CMIP6 models to determine how the length of the summer rainy season and precipitation extremes over the Asian summer monsoon domain will change in response to greenhouse warming. Over East Asia the models simulate on average on the earlier onset and later retreat; whereas over India, the retreat will occur later. The model simulations also show an intensification of extreme rainfall events, as well as an increase of seasonal drought conditions. These results demonstrate the high volatility of the Asian summer monsoon systems and further highlight the need for improved water management strategies in this densely populated part of the world.", "title": "Future Changes of Summer Monsoon Characteristics and Evaporative Demand Over Asia in CMIP6 Simulations"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4790080F", "abstract": "The COVID-19 epidemic has substantially limited human activities and affected anthropogenic emissions. In this work, daily NO<SUB>x</SUB> emissions are inferred using a regional data assimilation system and hourly surface NO<SUB>2</SUB> measurement over China. The results show that because of the coronavirus outbreak, NO<SUB>x</SUB> emissions across the whole mainland China dropped sharply after 31 January, began to rise slightly in certain areas after 10 February, and gradually recover across the country after 20 February. Compared with the emissions before the outbreak, NO<SUB>x</SUB> emissions fell by more than 60% and ~30% in many large cities and most small to medium cities, respectively. Overall, NO<SUB>x</SUB> emissions were reduced by 36% over China, which were mainly contributed by transportation. Evaluations show that the inverted changes over eastern China are credible, whereas those in western China might be underestimated. These findings are of great significance for exploring the reduction potential of NO<SUB>x</SUB> emissions in China.", "title": "NO<SUB>x</SUB> Emission Changes Over China During the COVID-19 Epidemic Inferred From Surface NO<SUB>2</SUB> Observations"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786902C", "abstract": "Changes in global land monsoon GLM precipitation determine the local water resource, affecting two thirds of global population. The future changes in GLM summer precipitation and the sources of projection uncertainty under four scenarios are investigated using the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 CMIP6 models. The GLM summer precipitation is projected to increase by 1.76 \u00b1 1.57% 2.54 \u00b1 2.22%, 1.33 \u00b1 1.97% 3.52 \u00b1 3.05%, 0.96 \u00b1 2.04% 3.51 \u00b1 4.97%, and 1.71 \u00b1 2.38% 5.75 \u00b1 5.92% in the near long term under Shared Socioeconomic Pathway SSP 1-2.6, SSP2-4.5, SSP3-7.0, and SSP5-8.5, respectively. The enhancement is caused by thermodynamic responses due to increased moisture, which is partly offset by dynamic responses due to weakened circulation. The uncertainty in GLM precipitation projection is the largest in SSP5-8.5 long-term projection. The uncertainty of submonsoon precipitation projections is larger than that in GLM precipitation. The uncertainty of monsoon precipitation projection arises from the circulation changes, which can be partly explained by model-dependent response to uniform sea surface temperature warming.", "title": "Global Land Monsoon Precipitation Changes in CMIP6 Projections"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785578Z", "abstract": "Glaciers in the European Alps rapidly lose mass to adapt to changes in climate conditions. Here, we investigate the relationship and lag between climate forcing and geometric glacier response with a regional glacier evolution model accounting for ice dynamics. The volume loss occurring as a result of the glacier-climate imbalance increased over the early 21st century, from about 35% in 2001 to 44% in 2010. This committed loss reduced to ~40% by 2018, indicating that temperature increase was outweighing glacier retreat in the early 2000s but that the fast retreat effectively somewhat diminished glacier imbalances. We analyze the lag in glacier response for each individual glacier and find mean response times of 50 \u00b1 28 years. Our findings indicate that the response time is primarily controlled by glacier slope and secondarily by elevation range and mass balance gradient, rather than by glacier size.", "title": "On the Imbalance and Response Time of Glaciers in the European Alps"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788166M", "abstract": "The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation AMOC has been, and will continue to be, a key factor in the modulation of climate change both locally and globally. However, there remains considerable uncertainty in recent AMOC evolution. Here, we show that the multimodel mean AMOC strengthened by approximately 10% from 1850-1985 in new simulations from the 6th Coupled Model Intercomparison Project CMIP6, a larger change than was seen in CMIP5. Across the models, the strength of the AMOC trend up to 1985 is related to a proxy for the strength of the aerosol forcing. Therefore, the multimodel difference is a result of stronger anthropogenic aerosol forcing on average in CMIP6 than CMIP5, which is primarily due to more models including aerosol-cloud interactions. However, observational constraints\u2014including a historical sea surface temperature fingerprint and shortwave radiative forcing in recent decades\u2014suggest that anthropogenic forcing and/or the AMOC response may be overestimated.", "title": "Aerosol-Forced AMOC Changes in CMIP6 Historical Simulations"}, {"bibcode": "2020Ap&SS.365....9J", "abstract": "In the present article, the Eiesland condition has been used to obtain a new solution for compact star model by considering a non-singular well behaved gravitational potential of the form e<SUP>\u03bb r </SUP>=1 +a r<SUP>2</SUP>[1<SUP>+tanhb r<SUP>2</SUP>+c ] n</SUP> in the framework of anisotropic matter distribution. The solution so obtained is physically acceptable, which is exploited to compare the predicted masses and radii of known compact object as EXO 1785-248 M =1.3 M<SUB>\u2609</SUB> for n =3 to 15. Moreover, the obtained solution satisfies the causality condition, Herrera cracking criterion, Tolman-Oppenheimer-Volkoff TOV equation, and adiabatic index \u0393 including all energy conditions. It is noted that the velocity of sound is increasing at n =3 and start decreasing when n \u22656 which shows that the parameter n plays an important role to describe a well-behaved solution for anisotropic compact object. The moment of inertia I  is also obtained by Bejger-Haensel formula for n =3 to 15. In addition to that, the maximum mass for the compact star has been discovered via. M -R curve for different values of n.", "title": "A generalised embedding class one static solution describing anisotropic fluid sphere"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.175..300L", "abstract": "The cavity flameholder is the most efficient way for the mixing of the fuel through the supersonic combustion tank. In current article, the impact of the extended strut in the upstream of the chamber flame holder on the mixing efficiency of fuel is comprehensively scrutinized. The present work investigated the hydrogen distribution of the multi-jets in different directions. CFD method is applied for the simulation of the multi-fuel jet at the supersonic free stream with Ma = 4. The effects of free-stream Ma and length of the extended strut on the fuel distribution are also demonstrated. The structure of the fuel jets and air stream entrain to the cavity in various conditions are studied. According to our results, the mixing zone of counter multi jets is larger than co multi-jets. Our outcomes reveal that the extension of the strut to half of the cavity declines the power of the main circulation, and subsequently, the mixing zone is limited. Furthermore, increasing the free-stream Mach intensifies the wake behind the strut, and this enriches the fuel mixing inside the cavity.", "title": "Mixing enhancement of multi hydrogen jets through the cavity flameholder with extended pylon"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.175..300L", "abstract": "The cavity flameholder is the most efficient way for the mixing of the fuel through the supersonic combustion tank. In current article, the impact of the extended strut in the upstream of the chamber flame holder on the mixing efficiency of fuel is comprehensively scrutinized. The present work investigated the hydrogen distribution of the multi-jets in different directions. CFD method is applied for the simulation of the multi-fuel jet at the supersonic free stream with Ma = 4. The effects of free-stream Ma and length of the extended strut on the fuel distribution are also demonstrated. The structure of the fuel jets and air stream entrain to the cavity in various conditions are studied. According to our results, the mixing zone of counter multi jets is larger than co multi-jets. Our outcomes reveal that the extension of the strut to half of the cavity declines the power of the main circulation, and subsequently, the mixing zone is limited. Furthermore, increasing the free-stream Mach intensifies the wake behind the strut, and this enriches the fuel mixing inside the cavity.", "title": "Mixing enhancement of multi hydrogen jets through the cavity flameholder with extended pylon"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786524C", "abstract": "Geomagnetic indices are routinely used to characterize space weather event intensity. The DST index is well resolved but is only available over five solar cycles. The aa index extends over 14 cycles but is highly discretized with poorly resolved extremes. We parameterize extreme aa activity by the annual-averaged top few percent of observed values, show that these are exponentially distributed, and they track annual DST index minima. This gives a 14-cycle average of \u223c4% chance of at least one great DST&lt;-500 nT storm and \u223c28% chance of at least one severe DST&lt;-250 nT storm per year. At least one DST=-809 &gt;[-663,-955&gt;] nT event in a given year would be a 1:151 year event. Carrington event estimate DST\u223c-850 nT is within the same distribution as other extreme activity seen in aa since 1868 so that its likelihood can be deduced from that of more moderate events. Events with DST\u2272-1,000 nT are in a distinct class, requiring special conditions.", "title": "Using the aa Index Over the Last 14 Solar Cycles to Characterize Extreme Geomagnetic Activity"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787820U", "abstract": "Quantifying how climate change drives drought is a priority to inform policy and adaptation planning. We show that the latest Coupled Model Intercomparison Project CMIP6 simulations project coherent regional patterns in meteorological drought for two emissions scenarios to 2100. We find robust projected changes in seasonal drought duration and frequency robust over &gt;45% of the global land area, despite a lack of agreement across models in projected changes in mean precipitation 24% of the land area. Future drought changes are larger and more consistent in CMIP6 compared to CMIP5. We find regionalized increases and decreases in drought duration and frequency that are driven by changes in both precipitation mean and variability. Conversely, drought intensity increases over most regions but is not simulated well historically by the climate models. The more robust projections of meteorological drought compared to mean precipitation in CMIP6 provides significant new opportunities for water resource planning.", "title": "Robust Future Changes in Meteorological Drought in CMIP6 Projections Despite Uncertainty in Precipitation"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787373M", "abstract": "Atmospheric aerosol plays critical roles in suppressing planetary boundary layer PBL and deteriorating air quality. However, comprehensive understanding on how aerosol optical properties absorption and scattering affect PBL remains lacking. Utilizing a large-eddy simulation model incorporated with in situ observations, we demonstrate distinct impacts of absorption aerosol on PBL development when it is present below stove effect and promotion or above morning residual layer dome effect and strong inhibition and similar inhibition umbrella effects of scattering aerosol on PBL regardless of its vertical locations. There exists a transition height, above which absorption aerosol is more effective in suppressing PBL and below which scattering aerosol dominates the suppression. This height is highly related to the height of morning residual layer. Aerosol stove, dome, and umbrella effects enrich our knowledge on aerosol-PBL interactions and the latter two can be interpreted as \"double inhibitions\" in promoting haze episodes in the North China Plain.", "title": "The Stove, Dome, and Umbrella Effects of Atmospheric Aerosol on the Development of the Planetary Boundary Layer in Hazy Regions"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787376W", "abstract": "Measurements of present-day surface deformation are essential for the assessment of long-term seismic hazard. The European Space Agencys Sentinel-1 satellites enable global, high-resolution observation of crustal motion from Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar InSAR. We have developed automated InSAR processing systems that exploit the first ~5 years of Sentinel-1 data to measure surface motions for the ~800,000-km<SUP>2</SUP> Anatolian region. Our new 3-D velocity and strain rate fields illuminate deformation patterns dominated by westward motion of Anatolia relative to Eurasia, localized strain accumulation along the North and East Anatolian Faults, and rapid vertical signals associated with anthropogenic activities and to a lesser extent extension across the grabens of western Anatolia. We show that automatically processed Sentinel-1 InSAR data can characterize details of the velocity and strain rate fields with high resolution and accuracy over large regions. These results are important for assessing the relationship between strain accumulation and release in earthquakes.", "title": "High-Resolution Surface Velocities and Strain for Anatolia From Sentinel-1 InSAR and GNSS Data"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785679W", "abstract": "Changes in Arctic sea ice have been proposed to affect midlatitude winter atmospheric circulation, often based on observed coincident variability. However, causality of this covariability remains unclear. Here, we address this issue using atmospheric model experiments prescribed with observed sea surface temperature variations and either constant or time-varying sea ice variability. We show that the observed relationship between late-autumn Barents-Kara sea ice and the winter North Atlantic Oscillation can be reproduced by simulated atmospheric internal variability but is not simulated as a forced response to sea ice. Observations and models suggest reduced sea ice is linked to a weaker Aleutian Low. We show that simulated Aleutian Low variability is correlated with observed sea ice variability even in simulations with fixed sea ice, implying that this relationship is not incidental. Instead, we suggest that covariability between sea ice and the Aleutian Low originates from tropical sea surface temperature and rainfall variations and their teleconnections to the extratropics.", "title": "Links Between Barents-Kara Sea Ice and the Extratropical Atmospheric Circulation Explained by Internal Variability and Tropical Forcing"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532723R", "abstract": "A minor sudden stratospheric warming SSW happened in September 2019 in the Southern Hemisphere SH with winds at 10 hPa, 60\u00b0S reaching their minimum value on 18 September. Using multiple data sets and real-time predictions from 11 subseasonal to seasonal S2S models, the evolution, favorable conditions, and predictability for this SSW event are explored. The September 2019 SSW happened during several favorable conditions, including easterly equatorial quasi-biennial oscillation QBO winds at 10 hPa, solar minimum, positive Indian Ocean Dipole IOD sea surface temperatures SST, warm SST anomalies in the central Pacific, and a blocking high near the Antarctic Peninsula. With these favorable initial and boundary conditions, the predictive limit to this SSW is around 18 days in some S2S models, and more than 50% of the ensemble members forecast the zonal wind deceleration in reforecasts initialized around 29 August. A vortex slowdown is evident in some initializations from around 22 August, but with a forecast-reanalysis pattern correlation %3C0.5, while initializations later than 29 August capture the wavelike pattern in the troposphere and the subsequent stratospheric evolution. The ensemble spread in the magnitude of the vortex deceleration during the SSW is mainly explained by the ensemble spread in the magnitude of upward propagation of waves in the troposphere and in the stratosphere, with an underestimated tropospheric wave amplitude leading to a too-small deceleration of the vortex. The September 2019 SH SSW did not show a near-instantaneous downward impact on the tropospheric southern annular mode SAM in late September and early October 2019. The Australian drought and hot weather in September possibly associated with the positive IOD might have been exacerbated by the negative SAM in October and later months due to the weak stratospheric polar vortex. However, models tend to forecast a near-instantaneous tropospheric response to the SSW.", "title": "The Southern Hemisphere Minor Sudden Stratospheric Warming in September 2019 and its Predictions in S2S Models"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506282B", "abstract": "Asteroid 101955 Bennu, a near-Earth object with a primitive carbonaceous chondrite-like composition, was observed by the Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, and Security-Regolith Explorer OSIRIS-REx spacecraft to undergo multiple particle ejection events near perihelion between December 2018 and February 2019. The three largest events observed during this period, which all occurred 3.5 to 6 hr after local noon, placed numerous particles &lt;10 cm on temporary orbits around Bennu. Here we examine whether these events could have been produced by sporadic meteoroid impacts using the National Aeronautics and Space Administrations NASA Meteoroid Engineering Model 3.0. Most projectiles that impact Bennu come from nearly isotropic or Jupiter-family comets and have evolved toward the Sun by Poynting-Robertson drag. We find that 7,000-J impacts on Bennu occur with a biweekly cadence near perihelion, with a preference to strike in the late afternoon ~6 pm local time. This timing matches observations. Crater scaling laws also indicate that these impact energies can reproduce the sizes and masses of the largest observed particles, provided the surface has the cohesive properties of weak, porous materials. Bennus ejection events could be caused by the same kinds of meteoroid impacts that created the Moons asymmetric debris cloud observed by the Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Environment Explorer LADEE. Our findings also suggest that fewer ejection events should take place as Bennu moves further away from the Sun, a result that can be tested with future observations.", "title": "Meteoroid Impacts as a Source of Bennu's Particle Ejection Events"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506282B", "abstract": "Asteroid 101955 Bennu, a near-Earth object with a primitive carbonaceous chondrite-like composition, was observed by the Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, and Security-Regolith Explorer OSIRIS-REx spacecraft to undergo multiple particle ejection events near perihelion between December 2018 and February 2019. The three largest events observed during this period, which all occurred 3.5 to 6 hr after local noon, placed numerous particles &lt;10 cm on temporary orbits around Bennu. Here we examine whether these events could have been produced by sporadic meteoroid impacts using the National Aeronautics and Space Administrations NASA Meteoroid Engineering Model 3.0. Most projectiles that impact Bennu come from nearly isotropic or Jupiter-family comets and have evolved toward the Sun by Poynting-Robertson drag. We find that 7,000-J impacts on Bennu occur with a biweekly cadence near perihelion, with a preference to strike in the late afternoon ~6 pm local time. This timing matches observations. Crater scaling laws also indicate that these impact energies can reproduce the sizes and masses of the largest observed particles, provided the surface has the cohesive properties of weak, porous materials. Bennus ejection events could be caused by the same kinds of meteoroid impacts that created the Moons asymmetric debris cloud observed by the Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Environment Explorer LADEE. Our findings also suggest that fewer ejection events should take place as Bennu moves further away from the Sun, a result that can be tested with future observations.", "title": "Meteoroid Impacts as a Source of Bennu's Particle Ejection Events"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRB..12518656S", "abstract": "Accurate ground motion prediction requires detailed site effect assessment, but in urban areas where such assessments are most important, geotechnical surveys are difficult to perform, limiting their availability. Distributed acoustic sensing DAS offers an appealing alternative by repurposing existing fiber-optic cables, normally employed for telecommunication, as an array of seismic sensors. We present a proof-of-concept demonstration by using DAS to produce high-resolution maps of the shallow subsurface with the Stanford DAS array, California. We describe new methods and their assumptions to assess H/V spectral ratio\u2014a technique widely used to estimate the natural frequency of the soil\u2014and to extract Rayleigh wave dispersion curves from ambient seismic field. These measurements are jointly inverted to provide models of shallow seismic velocities and sediment thicknesses above bedrock in central campus. The good agreement with an independent survey validates the methodology and demonstrates the power of DAS for microzonation.", "title": "Urban Seismic Site Characterization by Fiber-Optic Seismology"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506295A", "abstract": "The Curiosity rovers exploration of rocks and soils in Gale crater has provided diverse geochemical and mineralogical data sets, underscoring the complex geological history of the region. We report the crystalline, clay mineral, and amorphous phase distributions of four Gale crater rocks from an 80-m stratigraphic interval. The mineralogy of the four samples is strongly influenced by aqueous alteration processes, including variations in water chemistries, redox, pH, and temperature. Localized hydrothermal events are evidenced by gray hematite and maturation of amorphous SiO<SUB>2</SUB> to opal-CT. Low-temperature diagenetic events are associated with fluctuating lake levels, evaporative events, and groundwater infiltration. Among all mudstones analyzed in Gale crater, the diversity in diagenetic processes is primarily captured by the mineralogy and X-ray amorphous chemistry of the drilled rocks. Variations indicate a transition from magnetite to hematite and an increase in matrix-associated sulfates suggesting intensifying influence from oxic, diagenetic fluids upsection. Furthermore, diagenetic fluid pathways are shown to be strongly affected by unconformities and sedimentary transitions, as evidenced by the intensity of alteration inferred from the mineralogy of sediments sampled adjacent to stratigraphic contacts.", "title": "Evidence for Multiple Diagenetic Episodes in Ancient Fluvial-Lacustrine Sedimentary Rocks in Gale Crater, Mars"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506295A", "abstract": "The Curiosity rovers exploration of rocks and soils in Gale crater has provided diverse geochemical and mineralogical data sets, underscoring the complex geological history of the region. We report the crystalline, clay mineral, and amorphous phase distributions of four Gale crater rocks from an 80-m stratigraphic interval. The mineralogy of the four samples is strongly influenced by aqueous alteration processes, including variations in water chemistries, redox, pH, and temperature. Localized hydrothermal events are evidenced by gray hematite and maturation of amorphous SiO<SUB>2</SUB> to opal-CT. Low-temperature diagenetic events are associated with fluctuating lake levels, evaporative events, and groundwater infiltration. Among all mudstones analyzed in Gale crater, the diversity in diagenetic processes is primarily captured by the mineralogy and X-ray amorphous chemistry of the drilled rocks. Variations indicate a transition from magnetite to hematite and an increase in matrix-associated sulfates suggesting intensifying influence from oxic, diagenetic fluids upsection. Furthermore, diagenetic fluid pathways are shown to be strongly affected by unconformities and sedimentary transitions, as evidenced by the intensity of alteration inferred from the mineralogy of sediments sampled adjacent to stratigraphic contacts.", "title": "Evidence for Multiple Diagenetic Episodes in Ancient Fluvial-Lacustrine Sedimentary Rocks in Gale Crater, Mars"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRB..12518558S", "abstract": "The seismicity rate in the Delaware Basin, located in western Texas and southeastern New Mexico, has increased by orders of magnitude within the past ~5 years. While no seismicity was reported in the southern Delaware Basin during 1980-2014, 37 earthquakes with M &gt; 3 occurred in this area during 2015-2018. We generated an improved catalog of ~37,000 earthquakes in this region during 2009-2018 by applying multistation template matching at both regional and local stations using all earthquakes in the Advanced National Seismic System ANSS and TexNet catalogs. We found that the vast majority of the seismicity is most likely associated with wastewater disposal, while at least ~5% of the seismicity was induced directly by hydraulic fracturing. We inferred far-field effects of wastewater disposal inducing earthquakes over distances &gt;25 km. The spatial limits of seismicity correlate with geologic structures that include the Central Platform and Grisham Fault, suggesting hydrologic compartmentalization by low-permeability boundaries. Given that the seismicity rate increased throughout the duration of the study, if industry operations continue unaltered, it is likely that both the seismicity rate and number of M &gt; 3 earthquakes may continue to increase in the future.", "title": "Induced Seismicity in the Delaware Basin, Texas"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506160R", "abstract": "The debate over the early Martian climate is among the most intriguing in planetary science. Although the geologic evidence generally supports a warmer and wetter climate, climate models have had difficulty simulating such a scenario, leading some to suggest that the observed fluvial geology e.g., valley networks, modified landscapes on the Martian surface could have formed in a cold climate instead. However, as we have originally predicted using a single-column radiative-convective climate model Ramirez, Kopparapu, Zugger, et al., 2014, <A href=\"https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2000\">https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2000</A>, warming from CO<SUB>2</SUB>-H<SUB>2</SUB> collision-induced absorption on a volcanically active early Mars could have raised mean surface temperatures above the freezing point, with later calculations showing that this is achievable with hydrogen concentrations as low as ~1%. Nevertheless, these predictions should be tested against more complex models. Here we use an advanced energy balance model that includes a northern lowlands ocean to show that mean surface temperatures near or slightly above the freezing point of water were necessary to carve the valley networks. Our scenario is consistent with a relatively large ocean as has been suggested. Valley network distributions would have been global prior to subsequent removal processes. At lower mean surface temperatures and smaller ocean sizes, precipitation and surface erosion efficiency diminish. The warm period may have been approximately &lt;10<SUP>7</SUP> years, perhaps suggesting that episodic warming mechanisms were not needed. Atmospheric collapse and permanently glaciated conditions occur once surface ice coverage exceeds a threshold depending on collision-induced absorption assumptions. Our results support an early warm and semiarid climate consistent with many geologic observations.", "title": "Climate Simulations of Early Mars With Estimated Precipitation, Runoff, and Erosion Rates"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506160R", "abstract": "The debate over the early Martian climate is among the most intriguing in planetary science. Although the geologic evidence generally supports a warmer and wetter climate, climate models have had difficulty simulating such a scenario, leading some to suggest that the observed fluvial geology e.g., valley networks, modified landscapes on the Martian surface could have formed in a cold climate instead. However, as we have originally predicted using a single-column radiative-convective climate model Ramirez, Kopparapu, Zugger, et al., 2014, <A href=\"https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2000\">https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2000</A>, warming from CO<SUB>2</SUB>-H<SUB>2</SUB> collision-induced absorption on a volcanically active early Mars could have raised mean surface temperatures above the freezing point, with later calculations showing that this is achievable with hydrogen concentrations as low as ~1%. Nevertheless, these predictions should be tested against more complex models. Here we use an advanced energy balance model that includes a northern lowlands ocean to show that mean surface temperatures near or slightly above the freezing point of water were necessary to carve the valley networks. Our scenario is consistent with a relatively large ocean as has been suggested. Valley network distributions would have been global prior to subsequent removal processes. At lower mean surface temperatures and smaller ocean sizes, precipitation and surface erosion efficiency diminish. The warm period may have been approximately &lt;10<SUP>7</SUP> years, perhaps suggesting that episodic warming mechanisms were not needed. Atmospheric collapse and permanently glaciated conditions occur once surface ice coverage exceeds a threshold depending on collision-induced absorption assumptions. Our results support an early warm and semiarid climate consistent with many geologic observations.", "title": "Climate Simulations of Early Mars With Estimated Precipitation, Runoff, and Erosion Rates"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532184B", "abstract": "Finer grids in global climate models could lead to an improvement in the simulation of precipitation extremes. We assess the influence on model performance of increasing spatial resolution by evaluating pairs of high- and low-resolution forced atmospheric simulations from six global climate models generally the latest CMIP6 version on a common 1\u00b0 \u00d7 1\u00b0 grid. The differences in tuning between the lower and higher resolution versions are as limited as possible, which allows the influence of higher resolution to be assessed exclusively. We focus on the 1985-2014 climatology of annual extremes of daily precipitation over global land, and models are compared to observations from different sources i.e., in situ-based and satellite-based to enable consideration of observational uncertainty. Finally, we address regional features of model performance based on four indices characterizing different aspects of precipitation extremes. Our analysis highlights good agreement between models that precipitation extremes are more intense at higher resolution. We find that the spread among observations is substantial and can be as large as intermodel differences, which makes the quantitative evaluation of model performance difficult. However, consistently across the four precipitation extremes indices that we investigate, models often show lower skill at higher resolution compared to their corresponding lower resolution version. Our findings suggest that increasing spatial resolution alone is not sufficient to obtain a systematic improvement in the simulation of precipitation extremes, and other improvements e.g., physics and tuning may be required.", "title": "Impact of Higher Spatial Atmospheric Resolution on Precipitation Extremes Over Land in Global Climate Models"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786764K", "abstract": "The role of black carbon BC in ice crystal formation via immersion freezing relevant for mixed-phase cloud formation is uncertain. Previous studies report either negligible or significant contributions of BC particles to cloud glaciation via immersion freezing. Despite conflicting evidence, immersion freezing by BC particles is included in several cloud models. Here we show that fossil fuel soot and commercially available hydrocarbon BC is inactive as immersion freezing nuclei for atmospherically relevant particle sizes and surface areas. Instead, temperatures &lt;235 K are necessary for freezing droplets with immersed soot particles, implying homogeneous freezing, rather than immersion freezing by soot. A comparison of the results to previous studies using larger soot aggregates and dust reveals the ineffectiveness of soot as immersion ice nucleating particles. We conclude that soot particles with properties like those investigated here can be neglected for simulating ice nucleation in mixed-phase clouds.", "title": "Black Carbon Particles Do Not Matter for Immersion Mode Ice Nucleation"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12531672D", "abstract": "Evapotranspiration ET is a crucial quantity through which land surface conditions can impact near-surface weather and vice versa. ET can be limited by energy or water availability. The transition between water- and energy-limited regimes is marked by the critical soil moisture CSM, which is traditionally derived from small-sample laboratory analyses. Here, we aim to determine the CSM at a larger spatial scale relevant for climate modeling, using state-of-the-art gridded data sets. For this purpose, we introduce a new correlation-difference metric with which the CSM can be accurately inferred using multiple data streams. We perform such an analysis at the continental scale and determine a large-scale CSM as an emergent property. In addition, we determine small-scale CSMs at the grid cell scale and find substantial spatial variability. Consistently from both analyses we find that soil texture, climate conditions, and vegetation characteristics are influencing the CSM, with similar respective importance. In contrast, comparable CSMs are found when applying alternative large-scale energy and vegetation data sets, highlighting the robustness of our results. Based on our findings, the state of the vegetation and corresponding land-atmosphere coupling can be inferred, to first order, from easily accessible satellite observations of surface soil moisture.", "title": "Critical Soil Moisture Derived From Satellite Observations Over Europe"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786405L", "abstract": "Recent progress in remote sensing has snapshotted unprecedented numbers of river planform geometry, providing opportunity to revisit the oversimplified channel shape parameterizations in global hydrologic models. This study leveraged two recent Landsat-derived global river width databases and created a reach-level width dataset to measure the validity of model parameterizations at ~1.6 million kilometers of rivers in length. By showing state-of-the-art parameterization schemes only capture 30-40% of the width variance globally, we developed a machine learning ML approach surveying 16 environmental covariates, which considerably improved the predictive power R<SUP>2</SUP> = 0.81 and 0.77 for two testing cases. Beyond the commonly discussed upstream basin conditions, ML revealed that local physiographic factors and human interference are also important covariates for width variability. Finally, we applied the ML model to estimate bankfull river width, creating a new reach-level dataset for use in global hydrodynamic modeling.", "title": "Global Estimates of Reach-Level Bankfull River Width Leveraging Big Data Geospatial Analysis"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527485B", "abstract": "The Galilean moons play major roles in the giant magnetosphere of Jupiter. At the same time, the magnetospheric particles and fields affect the moons. The impact of magnetospheric ions on the moons atmospheres supplies clouds of escaping neutral atoms that populate a substantial fraction of their orbits. At the same time, ionization of atoms in the neutral cloud is the primary source of magnetospheric plasma. The stability of this feedback loop depends on the plasma/moon-atmosphere interaction. The purpose of this review is to describe the physical processes that shape the space environment around the two innermost Galilean moons\u2014Io and Europa\u2014and to show their impact from the planet Jupiter out into interplanetary space.", "title": "The Space Environment of Io and Europa"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12527485B", "abstract": "The Galilean moons play major roles in the giant magnetosphere of Jupiter. At the same time, the magnetospheric particles and fields affect the moons. The impact of magnetospheric ions on the moons atmospheres supplies clouds of escaping neutral atoms that populate a substantial fraction of their orbits. At the same time, ionization of atoms in the neutral cloud is the primary source of magnetospheric plasma. The stability of this feedback loop depends on the plasma/moon-atmosphere interaction. The purpose of this review is to describe the physical processes that shape the space environment around the two innermost Galilean moons\u2014Io and Europa\u2014and to show their impact from the planet Jupiter out into interplanetary space.", "title": "The Space Environment of Io and Europa"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...58C", "abstract": "The distant ice giants of the Solar System, Uranus and Neptune, have only been visited by one space mission, Voyager 2. The current knowledge on their composition remains very limited despite some recent advances. A better characterization of their composition is however essential to constrain their formation and evolution, as a significant fraction of their mass is made of heavy elements, contrary to the gas giants Jupiter and Saturn. An in situ probe like Galileo would provide us with invaluable direct ground-truth composition measurements. However, some of the condensibles will remain out of the grasp of a shallow probe. While additional constraints could be obtained from a complementary orbiter, thermochemistry and diffusion modeling can further help us to increase the science return of an in situ probe.", "title": "The Deep Composition of Uranus and Neptune from In Situ Exploration and Thermochemical Modeling"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...26A", "abstract": "Lightning was detected by Voyager 2 at Uranus and Neptune, and weaker electrical processes also occur throughout planetary atmospheres from galactic cosmic ray GCR ionisation. Lightning is an indicator of convection, whereas electrical processes away from storms modulate cloud formation and chemistry, particularly if there is little insolation to drive other mechanisms. The ice giants appear to be unique in the Solar System in that they are distant enough from the Sun for GCR-related mechanisms to be significant for clouds and climate, yet also convective enough for lightning to occur. This paper reviews observations both from Voyager 2 and Earth, data analysis and modelling, and considers options for future missions. Radio, energetic particle and magnetic instruments are recommended for future orbiters, and Huygens-like atmospheric electricity sensors for in situ observations. Uranian lightning is also expected to be detectable from terrestrial radio telescopes.", "title": "Atmospheric Electricity at the Ice Giants"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785976M", "abstract": "In this study, we present a fast and reliable method for end-to-end estimation of earthquake magnitude from raw waveforms recorded at single stations. We design a regressor MagNet composed of convolutional and recurrent neural networks that is not sensitive to the data normalization, hence waveform amplitude information can be utilized during the training. The network can learn distance-dependent and site-dependent functions directly from the training data. Our model can predict local magnitudes with an average error close to zero and standard deviation of ~0.2 based on single-station waveforms without instrument response correction. We test the network for both local and duration magnitude scales and show a station-based learning can be an effective approach for improving the performance. The proposed approach has a variety of potential applications from routine earthquake monitoring to early warning systems.", "title": "A Machine-Learning Approach for Earthquake Magnitude Estimation"}, {"bibcode": "2020JPCom...1c5006C", "abstract": "Networks are a widely used and efficient paradigm to model real-world systems where basic units interact pairwise. Many body interactions are often at play, and cannot be modelled by resorting to binary exchanges. In this work, we consider a general class of dynamical systems anchored on hypergraphs. Hyperedges of arbitrary size ideally encircle individual units so as to account for multiple, simultaneous interactions. These latter are mediated by a combinatorial Laplacian, that is here introduced and characterised. The formalism of the master stability function is adapted to the present setting. Turing patterns and the synchronisation of non linear regular and chaotic oscillators are studied, for a general class of systems evolving on hypergraphs. The response to externally imposed perturbations bears the imprint of the higher order nature of the interactions.", "title": "Dynamical systems on hypergraphs"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506227D", "abstract": "Collisions that induce melting and vaporization can have a substantial effect on the thermal and geochemical evolution of planets. However, the thermodynamics of major minerals are not well known at the extreme conditions attained during planet formation. We obtained new data at the Sandia Z Machine and use published thermodynamic data for the major mineral forsterite Mg<SUB>2</SUB>SiO<SUB>4</SUB> to calculate the specific entropy in the liquid region of the principal Hugoniot. We use our calculated specific entropy of shocked forsterite, and revised entropies for shocked silica, to determine the critical impact velocities for melting or vaporization upon decompression from the shocked state to 1 bar and the triple points, which are near the pressures of the solar nebula. We also demonstrate the importance of the initial temperature on the criteria for vaporization. Applying these results to N-body simulations of terrestrial planet formation, we find that up to 20% to 40% of the total system mass is processed through collisions with velocities that exceed the criteria for incipient vaporization at the triple point. Vaporizing collisions between small bodies are an important component of terrestrial planet formation.", "title": "Silicate Melting and Vaporization During Rocky Planet Formation"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506227D", "abstract": "Collisions that induce melting and vaporization can have a substantial effect on the thermal and geochemical evolution of planets. However, the thermodynamics of major minerals are not well known at the extreme conditions attained during planet formation. We obtained new data at the Sandia Z Machine and use published thermodynamic data for the major mineral forsterite Mg<SUB>2</SUB>SiO<SUB>4</SUB> to calculate the specific entropy in the liquid region of the principal Hugoniot. We use our calculated specific entropy of shocked forsterite, and revised entropies for shocked silica, to determine the critical impact velocities for melting or vaporization upon decompression from the shocked state to 1 bar and the triple points, which are near the pressures of the solar nebula. We also demonstrate the importance of the initial temperature on the criteria for vaporization. Applying these results to N-body simulations of terrestrial planet formation, we find that up to 20% to 40% of the total system mass is processed through collisions with velocities that exceed the criteria for incipient vaporization at the triple point. Vaporizing collisions between small bodies are an important component of terrestrial planet formation.", "title": "Silicate Melting and Vaporization During Rocky Planet Formation"}, {"bibcode": "2020SSRv..216...16K", "abstract": "Quiet, discrete auroral arcs are an important and fundamental consequence of solar wind-magnetosphere interaction. We summarize the current standing of observations of such auroral arcs. We review the basic characteristics of the arcs, including occurrence in time and space, lifetimes, width and length, as well as brightness, and the energy of the magnetospheric electrons responsible for the optical emission. We briefly discuss the connection between single and multiple discrete arcs. The acceleration of the magnetospheric electrons by high-altitude electric potential structure is reviewed, together with our current knowledge of these structures. Observations relating to the potential drop, altitude distribution and lifetimes are reviewed, as well as direct evidence for the parallel electric fields of the acceleration structures. The current closure in the ionosphere of the currents carried by the auroral electrons is discussed together with its impact on the ionosphere and thermosphere. The connection of auroral arcs to the magnetosphere and generator regions is briefly touched upon. Finally we discuss how to progress from the current observational status to further our understanding of auroral arcs.", "title": "Quiet, Discrete Auroral Arcs\u2014Observations"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786258P", "abstract": "Imaging and resolving the lateral continuity of 3-D crustal structures enhance our ability to interpret seismicity and to understand how orogens are created. We apply a Bayesian, hierarchical inversion approach based on a transdimensional trees-structured wavelet parameterization to recover phase velocity maps at 2-40 s periods. We then invert phase velocity dispersion to constrain a 3-D shear velocity model of the crust beneath south-central Iran. Together with accurate earthquake centroid depths and focal mechanisms, the pattern of 3-D velocity variations supports recent suggestions that most large earthquakes in the Zagros occur within the lower sedimentary cover or close to the sediment-basement interface. Furthermore, we find evidence for Arabian basement underthrusting beneath central Iran, although only in one location does it appear to generate earthquakes. Our new 3-D tomographic model clarifies and throws new light on the crustal structure of the SE Zagros and its relation to seismicity and active faulting.", "title": "The Southern Zagros Collisional Orogen: New Insights From Transdimensional Trees Inversion of Seismic Noise"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787531L", "abstract": "The Tibetan Plateau accommodated major upper crustal shortening during Indian Plate oceanic and continental lithosphere subduction. Deciphering whether shortening was continuous or episodic, and how it correlates to major geodynamic changes is challenging. Here we apply anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility AMS, a sensitive synsedimentary strain indicator, to a ~3 km thick magnetostratigraphically dated sedimentary section 69-41.5 Ma in eastern Tibet. AMS shows \"earliest deformation\" fabrics from 69-52 Ma, followed by a sudden change to \"pencil structure\" fabrics with increasing anisotropy degree at ~52 Ma, dating a sudden increased synsedimentary shortening strain. This change coincides with enhanced sedimentation rates and synsedimentary vertical-axis rotations of the Gonjo Basin, suggesting a causal link to a marked India-Asia convergence rate deceleration. We show that AMS analysis provides a strong tool to distinguish between climatic and tectonic causes of sedimentological change and is an asset in identifying discrete tectonic pulses in intensely deformed terrane.", "title": "Anisotropy of Magnetic Susceptibility (AMS) Analysis of the Gonjo Basin as an Independent Constraint to Date Tibetan Shortening Pulses"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4790342L", "abstract": "In 2020, the Yangtze River YR suffered a long-persisting Meiyu season. The accumulated rainfall broke its record since 1961 and caused severe flooding and death in China. Our results show the sequential warm and cold Meiyu front regulated by the North Atlantic Oscillation NAO was responsible for this unexpected extreme Meiyu event. From 11 to 25 June with the positive NAO, the interaction between the South Asian High SAH and the western Pacific subtropical high maintained a warm front to strengthen the rainband north of the YR. Afterward, the coupling between SAH and midlatitude Mongolian Cyclone induced a cold front, which retreated the rainband to the south of YR from 30 June to 13 July with the negative NAO. Although the ECMWF S2S model successfully predicted the warm-front-related Meiyu rainband, it failed to forecast the Meiyu rainband in the cold-front period, suggesting a great challenge of S2S forecasting on Meiyu rainfall.", "title": "Record-Breaking Meiyu Rainfall Around the Yangtze River in 2020 Regulated by the Subseasonal Phase Transition of the North Atlantic Oscillation"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4787956M", "abstract": "Since 2006, six satellites measuring solar-induced chlorophyll fluorescence SIF have been launched to better constrain terrestrial gross primary productivity GPP. The promise of the SIF signal as a proxy for photosynthesis with a strong relationship to GPP has been widely cited in carbon cycling studies. However, chlorophyll fluorescence originates from dynamic energy partitioning at the leaf level and does not exhibit a uniformly linear relationship with photosynthesis at finer scales. We induced stomatal closure in deciduous woody tree branches and measured SIF at a proximal scale, alongside leaf-level gas exchange, pulse amplitude modulated PAM fluorescence, and leaf pigment content. We found no change in SIF or steady-state PAM fluorescence, despite clear reductions in stomatal conductance, carbon assimilation, and light-use efficiency in treated leaves. These findings suggest that equating SIF and photosynthesis is an oversimplification that may undermine the utility of SIF as a biophysical parameter in GPP models.", "title": "Solar-Induced Fluorescence Does Not Track Photosynthetic Carbon Assimilation Following Induced Stomatal Closure"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12531926N", "abstract": "This study investigates precipitation probability and its future changes using simulations from the Non-hydrostatic Icosahedral Atmospheric Model NICAM, a global cloud-resolving model, and Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 CMIP6 models. For the precipitation probability comparison between models and Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission TRMM during 1998-2008, the difference is greatly reduced by regridding to a common coarser resolution, but the difference signs largely remain. Both NICAM and CMIP6 model ensemble mean show less global-mean nonprecipitation fractions than observations, but NICAM agrees better with observations. For global-mean light precipitation probability, NICAM CMIP6 model ensemble mean is smaller larger than TRMM. NICAM shows higher heavy precipitation probability than TRMM in native resolutions, but it is close to TRMM and falls in the CMIP6 model range after regridding. For the precipitation probability changes from 1979-2008 to 2075-2104, NICAM predicts an increase in nonprecipitation and extreme heavy &gt;100 mm/day precipitation probability but a slight decrease in the probability for precipitation &lt;100 mm/day. After regridding to 2.5<SUP>o</SUP>, the precipitation intensity where the probability starts to increase becomes ~20 mm/day and the relative increases in nonprecipitation and heavy precipitation probability become much larger. Future heavy precipitation probability relative increases from CMIP6 models are much larger than NICAM at their native resolutions, but NICAM falls in the CMIP6 model range after regridding, indicating robust future increase decrease in heavy light precipitation probability regardless of underlying convection treatments. Discrepancy, however, exists in the projected nonprecipitation fraction changes: NICAM shows that nonprecipitation probability will increase over most of low and middle latitudes where CMIP6 models show less increases and even decreases.", "title": "Precipitation Probability and Its Future Changes From a Global Cloud-Resolving Model and CMIP6 Simulations"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785721B", "abstract": "Mechanisms for uplift and deformation of the Tibetan Plateau remain vigorously debated; hypotheses include stepwise growth, distributed thickening, and crustal channel flow, each with a distinct anisotropic signature. We have developed a new azimuthally anisotropic shear velocity model for the lithosphere beneath eastern Tibet, based on ambient noise tomography from 643 seismic stations. In our model, the Tibetan upper crust is characterized by strong anisotropy with fast axes that correlate with surface geology and mantle anisotropy, suggesting the occurrence of coherent deformation. However, a much different picture emerges in the middle and lower crust, where anisotropy is disordered and weaker beneath the plateau than along its margins, inconsistent with the prediction of large-scale eastward crust flow in eastern Tibet. Our observations are best explained by heterogeneous crustal thickening beneath the plateau with complex flow in the middle and lower crust, accompanied by asthenospheric upwelling along the southeastern plateau margin.", "title": "Episodic Lithospheric Deformation in Eastern Tibet Inferred From Seismic Anisotropy"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4784705X", "abstract": "Increasing lines of evidence question the homogenous response of Asian Summer Monsoon ASM precipitation patterns, requiring rethinking of the forcing mechanisms. Here we show a ~15,000-year quantitative precipitation history based on well-dated lake levels at Lake Chenghai, subtropical China. Lake levels and the inferred precipitation were high during the B\u00f8lling-Aller\u00f8d, early and late Holocene, but low during the middle Holocene. The orbital scale precipitation trend is out of phase with boreal summer insolation, the later has been widely suggested as the driver of ASM precipitation. Lake Chenghai long-term lake levels are synchronous with trends in tropical Pacific sea surface temperatures, the related zonal sea surface temperature gradients, and interhemispheric temperature gradients. We propose that changes in either the interhemispheric or zonal Pacific temperature gradients modulate the intensity and location of the western Pacific subtropical high, which is juxtaposed on the ASM, leading to heterogeneous hydroclimatic conditions over subtropical East Asia.", "title": "Juxtaposition of Western Pacific Subtropical High on Asian Summer Monsoon Shapes Subtropical East Asian Precipitation"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786189L", "abstract": "The two principle earthquakes of the July 2019 Ridgecrest, California, earthquake sequence, M<SUB>W</SUB> 6.4 and 7.1, and their immediate foreshocks and thousands of aftershocks present a challenging environment for rapid analysis and characterization of this sequence as it unfolded. In this study, we analyze the first 6 days of the sequence using continuous data from available seismic networks to detect and locate earthquakes associated with the earthquake sequence. We build a high-precision earthquake catalog using a deep-neural-network-based picker\u2014PhaseNet and a sequential earthquake association and location workflow. Without prior information, we automatically detect and locate more than twice as many earthquakes as the routine catalog. Our high-precision earthquake catalog reveals detailed spatiotemporal evolution of the earthquake sequence and clearly defines multiple faults activated during the sequence. Our study demonstrates that it is possible to characterize earthquake sequences from raw seismic data using a well-trained machine-learning picker and our workflow.", "title": "Rapid Characterization of the July 2019 Ridgecrest, California, Earthquake Sequence From Raw Seismic Data Using Machine-Learning Phase Picker"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.174..103H", "abstract": "The shock wave/boundary-layer interaction is a common phenomenon, and it occurs in the internal and external flow fields of the hypersonic vehicle. Then, the separation, the oscillatory flow structures, the heat transfer localization and the pressure loads would be induced accordingly. In this survey, recent advances on the shock wave/boundary-layer interaction and its control in the internal and external flow fields were summarized, and it is obvious that the micro-vortex generator has been widely used in both the internal and external flow fields to suppress the separation induced by the shock wave/boundary-layer interaction, and the quantitative measurement and assessment approaches should be developed. At the same time, the intelligent control approach should be combined with the flexible surface to fit the variation of the incoming boundary conditions. With the development of the hypersonic flight technique, the requirement of the wind tunnel with high Mach number is urgent, as well as its test time. At the same time, the Monte Carlo method is required to obtain the shock wave/boundary-layer interaction properties in the high Mach number.", "title": "Recent advances in the shock wave/boundary layer interaction and its control in internal and external flows"}, {"bibcode": "2020AcAau.174..103H", "abstract": "The shock wave/boundary-layer interaction is a common phenomenon, and it occurs in the internal and external flow fields of the hypersonic vehicle. Then, the separation, the oscillatory flow structures, the heat transfer localization and the pressure loads would be induced accordingly. In this survey, recent advances on the shock wave/boundary-layer interaction and its control in the internal and external flow fields were summarized, and it is obvious that the micro-vortex generator has been widely used in both the internal and external flow fields to suppress the separation induced by the shock wave/boundary-layer interaction, and the quantitative measurement and assessment approaches should be developed. At the same time, the intelligent control approach should be combined with the flexible surface to fit the variation of the incoming boundary conditions. With the development of the hypersonic flight technique, the requirement of the wind tunnel with high Mach number is urgent, as well as its test time. At the same time, the Monte Carlo method is required to obtain the shock wave/boundary-layer interaction properties in the high Mach number.", "title": "Recent advances in the shock wave/boundary layer interaction and its control in internal and external flows"}, {"bibcode": "2020AdAtS..37..137C", "abstract": "", "title": "Record-Setting Ocean Warmth Continued in 2019"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785988B", "abstract": "Trade-wind clouds exhibit a large diversity of spatial organizations at the mesoscale. Over the tropical western Atlantic, a recent study has visually identified four prominent mesoscale patterns of shallow convection, referred to as flowers, fish, gravel, and sugar. We show that these four patterns can be identified objectively from satellite observations by analyzing the spatial distribution of infrared brightness temperatures. By applying this analysis to 19 years of data, we examine relationships between cloud patterns and large-scale environmental conditions. This investigation reveals that on daily and interannual timescales, the near-surface wind speed and the strength of the lower-tropospheric stability discriminate the occurrence of the different organization patterns. These results, combined with the tight relationship between cloud patterns, low-level cloud amount, and cloud-radiative effects, suggest that the mesoscale organization of shallow clouds might change under global warming. The role of shallow convective organization in determining low-cloud feedback should thus be investigated.", "title": "Sugar, Gravel, Fish, and Flowers: Dependence of Mesoscale Patterns of Trade-Wind Clouds on Environmental Conditions"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4791098M", "abstract": "Recent advances in remote sensing of solar-induced chlorophyll fluorescence SIF have garnered wide interest from the biogeoscience and Earth system science communities, due to the observed linearity between SIF and gross primary productivity GPP at increasing spatiotemporal scales. Three recent studies, Maguire et al., 2020, <A href=\"https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087858\">https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087858</A>, He et al. 2020, <A href=\"https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087474\">https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087474</A>, and Marrs et al. 2020, <A href=\"https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087956\">https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL087956</A> highlight a nonlinear relationship between fluorescence and photochemical yields and show empirical evidence for the decoupling of SIF, stomata, and the carbon reactions of photosynthesis. Such mechanistic studies help advance our understanding of what SIF is and what it is not. We argue that these findings are not necessarily contradictory to the linear SIF-GPP relationship observed at the satellite scale and provide context for where, when, and why fluorescence and photosynthesis diverge at smaller spatiotemporal scales. Understanding scale dependencies of remote sensing data is crucial for interpreting SIF as a proxy for GPP.", "title": "On the Covariation of Chlorophyll Fluorescence and Photosynthesis Across Scales"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4785591L", "abstract": "The Larsen B ice shelf collapsed in 2002 losing an area twice the size of Greater London to the sea 3,000 km<SUP>2</SUP>, in an event associated with widespread supraglacial lake drainage. Here we use optical and radar satellite imagery to investigate the evolution of the ice shelfs lakes in the decades preceding collapse. We find 1 that lakes spread southward in the preceding decades at a rate commensurate with meltwater saturation of the shelf surface; 2 no trend in lake size, suggesting an active supraglacial drainage network which evacuated excess water off the shelf; and 3 lakes mostly refreeze in winter but the few lakes that do drain are associated with ice breakup 2-4 years later. Given the relative scale of lake drainage and shelf breakup, however, it is not clear from our data whether lake drainage is more likely a cause, or an effect, of ice shelf collapse.", "title": "Evolution of Supraglacial Lakes on the Larsen B Ice Shelf in the Decades Before it Collapsed"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4788000B", "abstract": "Floods often affect large regions and cause adverse societal impacts. Regional flood hazard and risk assessments therefore require a realistic representation of spatial flood dependencies to avoid the overestimation or underestimation of risk. However, it is not yet well understood how spatial flood dependence, that is, the degree of co-occurrence of floods at different locations, varies in space and time and which processes influence the strength of this dependence. We identify regions in the United States with seasonally similar flood behavior and analyze processes governing spatial dependence. We find that spatial flood dependence varies regionally and seasonally and is generally strongest in winter and spring and weakest in summer and fall. Moreover, we find that land-surface processes are crucial in shaping the spatiotemporal characteristics of flood events. We conclude that the regional and seasonal variations in spatial flood dependencies must be considered when conducting current and future flood risk assessments.", "title": "Spatial Dependence of Floods Shaped by Spatiotemporal Variations in Meteorological and Land-Surface Processes"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786797L", "abstract": "Impacts modelers and stakeholders use publicly available data sets of downscaled climate projections to assess and design infrastructure for changes in future rainfall extremes. If differences across data sets exist, infrastructure resilience decisions could change depending on which single data set is used. We assess changes in U.S. rainfall extremes from 2044-2099 compared with 1951-2005 based on 227 projections under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 from five widely used data sets. We show there are large differences in the change magnitude and its spatial structure between data sets. At the continental scale, the data sets show different increases, with high-end extremes e.g. 100-year event generally increasing more between 10% and 50% than low-end extremes e.g. 5-year. These differences largely contribute to the overall uncertainty for small average recurrence intervals ARIs extremes 2- to 10-year, while uncertainties due to short record length dominate large ARIs 25- to 100-year. The results indicate that robust infrastructure planning should consider these uncertainties to enable resilient infrastructure under climate change.", "title": "Uncertainties in Future U.S. Extreme Precipitation From Downscaled Climate Projections"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4783931K", "abstract": "The largest of dust storms on Mars are global dust events GDEs that affect essentially every aspect of the Martian atmosphere but do not occur in every Mars year. The Mars Climate Sounder globally observed the most recent GDE in 2018 throughout its lifecycle. The event started shortly after the southern spring equinox, with the first Mars Climate Sounder signature detected on 2 June 2018 Ls = 186.2\u00b0. It grew into a mature global event by the end of June Ls ~ 198\u00b0, with drastic changes to the atmospheric temperature, dust, and water ice profiles. It decayed over several months, reaching background conditions around southern summer solstice in October 2018. The 2018 GDE was very similar to the 2001 event, including the seasonal development and temperatures. GDEs appear to be distinct from even the largest regional dust storms. GDEs have 50-Pa zonal tropical temperatures &gt;220 K while no regional dust storm exceeds 205 K.", "title": "Mars Climate Sounder Observation of Mars' 2018 Global Dust Storm"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786836M", "abstract": "The Greenland Ice Sheet GrIS mass balance is examined with an Earth system/ice sheet model that interactively couples the GrIS to the broader Earth system. The simulation runs from 1850 to 2100, with historical and SSP5-8.5 forcing. By the mid-21st century, the cumulative GrIS contribution to global mean sea level rise SLR is 23 mm. During the second half of the 21st century, the surface mass balance becomes negative in all drainage basins, with an additional SLR contribution of 86 mm. The annual mean GrIS mass loss in the last two decades is 2.7-mm sea level equivalent SLE year<SUP>-1</SUP>. The increased SLR contribution from the surface mass balance 3.1 mm SLE year<SUP>-1</SUP> is partly offset by reduced ice discharge from thinning and retreat of outlet glaciers. The southern GrIS drainage basins contribute 73% of the mass loss in mid-century but 55% by 2100, as surface runoff increases in the northern basins.", "title": "Greenland Ice Sheet Contribution to 21st Century Sea Level Rise as Simulated by the Coupled CESM2.1-CISM2.1"}, {"bibcode": "2020GeoRL..4786756D", "abstract": "The release of long-stored carbon from thawed permafrost could fuel increased methanogenesis in northern lakes, but it remains unclear whether old carbon substrates released from permafrost are metabolized as rapidly by methanogenic microbial communities as recently produced organic carbon. Here, we apply methane CH<SUB>4</SUB> clumped isotope \u2206<SUB>18</SUB> and <SUP>14</SUP>C measurements to test whether rates of methanogenesis are related to carbon substrate age. Results from culture experiments indicate that \u2206<SUB>18</SUB> values are negatively correlated with CH<SUB>4</SUB> production rate. Measurements of ebullition samples from thermokarst lakes in Alaska and glacial lakes in Sweden indicate strong negative correlations between CH<SUB>4</SUB> \u2206<SUB>18</SUB> and the fraction modern carbon. These correlations imply that CH<SUB>4</SUB> derived from older carbon substrates is produced relatively slowly. Relative rates of methanogenesis, as inferred from \u2206<SUB>18</SUB> values, are not positively correlated with CH<SUB>4</SUB> flux estimates, highlighting the likely importance of environmental variables other than CH<SUB>4</SUB> production rates in controlling ebullition fluxes.", "title": "Clumped Isotopes Link Older Carbon Substrates With Slower Rates of Methanogenesis in Northern Lakes"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12530528Y", "abstract": "Satellite observations of the total column dry-air CO<SUB>2</SUB> X<SUB>CO2</SUB> are expected to support the quantification and monitoring of fossil fuel CO<SUB>2</SUB> ffCO<SUB>2</SUB> emissions from urban areas. We evaluate the utility of the Orbiting Carbon Observatory 2 OCO-2 X<SUB>CO2</SUB> retrievals to optimize whole-city emissions, using a Bayesian inversion system and high-resolution transport modeling. The uncertainties of constrained emissions related to transport model, satellite measurements, and local biospheric fluxes are quantified. For the first two uncertainty sources, we examine cities of different landscapes: \"plume city\" located in relatively flat terrain, represented by Riyadh and Cairo; and \"basin city\" located in basin terrain, represented by Los Angeles LA. The retrieved scaling factors of emissions and their uncertainties show prominent variabilities from track to track, due to the varying meteorological conditions and relative locations of the tracks transecting plumes. To explore the performance of multiple tracks in retrieving emissions, pseudo data experiments are carried out. The estimated least numbers of tracks required to constrain the total emissions for Riyadh &lt;10% uncertainty, Cairo &lt;10%, and LA &lt;5% are 8, 5, and 7, respectively. Additionally, to evaluate the impact of biospheric fluxes on derivation of the ffX<SUB>CO2</SUB> enhancements, we conduct simulations for Pearl River Delta metropolitan area. Significant fractions of local X<SUB>CO2</SUB> enhancements associated with local biospheric X<SUB>CO2</SUB> variations are shown, which potentially lead to biased estimates of ffCO<SUB>2</SUB> emissions. We demonstrate that satellite measurements can be used to improve urban ffCO<SUB>2</SUB> emissions with a sufficient amount of measurements and appropriate representations of the uncertainty components.", "title": "Constraining Fossil Fuel CO<SUB>2</SUB> Emissions From Urban Area Using OCO-2 Observations of Total Column CO<SUB>2</SUB>"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRB..12518213W", "abstract": "We utilize an array method called the frequency-Bessel transformation method to extract the multimodal dispersion curves of Rayleigh waves from ambient seismic noise data recorded by the USArray Transportable Array. We observe as many as five overtones dispersion curves of Rayleigh waves in the Midwestern United States, and four and three overtones dispersion curves, respectively, in the U.S. Great Plain area and Northeastern United States. We employ a quasi-Newton method to invert the multimodal dispersion curves for the shear velocity. We find that the sensitivity of overtones to deeper structures is higher than that of fundamental mode in the same frequency range. The utilization of overtones significantly improved the non-uniqueness and convergence of the inversions, which make the final inversion results robust and reliable. Our inversion results for S wave velocity Vs model in the studied areas exhibit some differences compared with Shen and Ritzwollers model 2016, <A href=\"https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JB012887\">https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JB012887</A>. The Vs falls abruptly in the lower crust 21-33 km in the U.S. Great Plain area and Northeastern U.S. areas. A high-velocity zone is observable in depth of 50-60 km in the U.S. Great Plain area and Midwestern United States, and all three models show larger Vs values below 50 km than those of Shen and Ritzwoller 2016.", "title": "Shear Velocity Inversion Using Multimodal Dispersion Curves From Ambient Seismic Noise Data of USArray Transportable Array"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506298S", "abstract": "Ground-based bedding orientation measurements are critical to determine the geologic history and processes of sedimentation in Gale crater, Mars. We constrain the dip of lacustrine strata of the Blunts Point, Pettegrove Point, and Jura members of the Murray formation using a combination of regional stratigraphic correlations and bed attitude measurements from stereo Mastcam images taken by the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover. In situ bed attitude measurements using a principal component analysis-based regression method reveal a wide range of dips and dip azimuths owing to a combination of high stereo errors, postdepositional deformation of strata e.g., fracturing, rotation, and impact cratering, and different primary depositional dips. These constrain regional dips to be within several degrees of horizontal on average. Stratigraphic correlations between targets observed in the Glen Torridon trough and at the Pettegrove Point-Jura member contact of Vera Rubin ridge VRR constrain dips to be between 3\u00b0SE and 2\u00b0NW, consistent with nearly flat strata deposited horizontally on an equipotential surface. The Jura member is determined to be stratigraphically equivalent to the northern portion of the Glen Torridon trough. Rover-based dip magnitudes are generally significantly shallower than the orientation of VRR member contacts measured from High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment-based traces, suggesting the sedimentary strata and VRR member contacts may be discordant.", "title": "Regional Structural Orientation of the Mount Sharp Group Revealed by In Situ Dip Measurements and Stratigraphic Correlations on the Vera Rubin Ridge"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506298S", "abstract": "Ground-based bedding orientation measurements are critical to determine the geologic history and processes of sedimentation in Gale crater, Mars. We constrain the dip of lacustrine strata of the Blunts Point, Pettegrove Point, and Jura members of the Murray formation using a combination of regional stratigraphic correlations and bed attitude measurements from stereo Mastcam images taken by the Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover. In situ bed attitude measurements using a principal component analysis-based regression method reveal a wide range of dips and dip azimuths owing to a combination of high stereo errors, postdepositional deformation of strata e.g., fracturing, rotation, and impact cratering, and different primary depositional dips. These constrain regional dips to be within several degrees of horizontal on average. Stratigraphic correlations between targets observed in the Glen Torridon trough and at the Pettegrove Point-Jura member contact of Vera Rubin ridge VRR constrain dips to be between 3\u00b0SE and 2\u00b0NW, consistent with nearly flat strata deposited horizontally on an equipotential surface. The Jura member is determined to be stratigraphically equivalent to the northern portion of the Glen Torridon trough. Rover-based dip magnitudes are generally significantly shallower than the orientation of VRR member contacts measured from High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment-based traces, suggesting the sedimentary strata and VRR member contacts may be discordant.", "title": "Regional Structural Orientation of the Mount Sharp Group Revealed by In Situ Dip Measurements and Stratigraphic Correlations on the Vera Rubin Ridge"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12531662H", "abstract": "A strong mountain wave, observed over Central Europe on 12 January 2016, is simulated in 2D under two fixed background wind conditions representing opposite tidal phases. The aim of the simulation is to investigate the breaking of the mountain wave and subsequent generation of nonprimary waves in the upper atmosphere. The model results show that the mountain wave first breaks as it approaches a mesospheric critical level creating turbulence on horizontal scales of 8-30 km. These turbulence scales couple directly to horizontal secondary waves scales, but those scales are prevented from reaching the thermosphere by the tidal winds, which act like a filter. Initial secondary waves that can reach the thermosphere range from 60 to 120 km in horizontal scale and are influenced by the scales of the horizontal and vertical forcing associated with wave breaking at mountain wave zonal phase width, and horizontal wavelength scales. Large-scale nonprimary waves dominate over the whole duration of the simulation with horizontal scales of 107-300 km and periods of 11-22 minutes. The thermosphere winds heavily influence the time-averaged spatial distribution of wave forcing in the thermosphere, which peaks at 150 km altitude and occurs both westward and eastward of the source in the 2 UT background simulation and primarily eastward of the source in the 7 UT background simulation. The forcing amplitude is \u223c2\u00d7 that of the primary mountain wave breaking and dissipation. This suggests that nonprimary waves play a significant role in gravity waves dynamics and improved understanding of the thermospheric winds is crucial to understanding their forcing distribution.", "title": "Secondary Gravity Waves Generated by Breaking Mountain Waves Over Europe"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506112X", "abstract": "The upcoming lunar Change-5 mission is scheduled to land near Mons R\u00fcmker, in northern Oceanus Procellarum, and return samples with masses up to 2 kg from depths up to ~2 m. A clear understanding of the regolith components in the candidate landing region is crucial to both the selection of sampling sites and the interpretation of the geological affinities for the returned samples. We quantitatively estimate the abundance of distantly sourced particles DSPs in the regolith at the landing region using an updated ballistic sedimentation model. Our results suggest that older units have a higher abundance of DSPs. In the targeted landing area, the total abundance of DSPs on the surface of the regolith varies from approximately 12% to 20%, and most of the DSPs on the surface are ejecta from the Pythagoras ~5% and/or Aristarchus ~7% craters. The youngest geological unit, which is located in the easternmost sector of the landing region, possesses the least DSPs in the regolith. Therefore, sampling the eastern unit has a higher potential of revealing both the petrological characteristics and age of the youngest mare basalt, which are fundamentally important to improve both the lunar crater chronology and the understanding of late-stage evolution of the Moon. Our results also indicate that the anorthositic material within the shallow regolith is most likely ejected from the Pythagoras and Aristarchus craters, which could further improve the understanding of lunar geology and chronology.", "title": "The Provenance of Regolith at the Chang'e-5 Candidate Landing Region"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRE..12506112X", "abstract": "The upcoming lunar Change-5 mission is scheduled to land near Mons R\u00fcmker, in northern Oceanus Procellarum, and return samples with masses up to 2 kg from depths up to ~2 m. A clear understanding of the regolith components in the candidate landing region is crucial to both the selection of sampling sites and the interpretation of the geological affinities for the returned samples. We quantitatively estimate the abundance of distantly sourced particles DSPs in the regolith at the landing region using an updated ballistic sedimentation model. Our results suggest that older units have a higher abundance of DSPs. In the targeted landing area, the total abundance of DSPs on the surface of the regolith varies from approximately 12% to 20%, and most of the DSPs on the surface are ejecta from the Pythagoras ~5% and/or Aristarchus ~7% craters. The youngest geological unit, which is located in the easternmost sector of the landing region, possesses the least DSPs in the regolith. Therefore, sampling the eastern unit has a higher potential of revealing both the petrological characteristics and age of the youngest mare basalt, which are fundamentally important to improve both the lunar crater chronology and the understanding of late-stage evolution of the Moon. Our results also indicate that the anorthositic material within the shallow regolith is most likely ejected from the Pythagoras and Aristarchus craters, which could further improve the understanding of lunar geology and chronology.", "title": "The Provenance of Regolith at the Chang'e-5 Candidate Landing Region"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRD..12532204R", "abstract": "We introduce a new climate model GISS E2.2 that has been specially optimized for the middle atmosphere and whose output is being contributed to the CMIP6 archive. The top of the model is at a geopotential altitude of 89 km, and parameterizations of moist convection and various forms of gravity wave drag based on tropospheric processes are chosen specifically for this optimization. We first evaluate the model in its configuration as a coupled atmosphere-chemistry model with respect to its simulation of the mean state of the middle atmosphere, from the mesosphere down through the upper troposphere/lower stratosphere. Then we assess its use as a coupled atmosphere-ocean climate model by exploring its mean ocean climatology. To evaluate its variability, we report on its simulation of the primary modes in the troposphere, stratosphere, and ocean. Two climate change simulations are presented, the responses to instantaneous increases of 2xCO<SUB>2</SUB> and 4xCO<SUB>2</SUB>, run with two different ocean models. Sensitivity studies are performed to illustrate the effect of parameterizations on the model results. We compare these results to the lower vertical resolution/top GISS Model E2.1, whose output has also been submitted to CMIP6. The different choices made for these models are explored. It is shown that important improvements in the circulation above and below the tropopause can be obtained when attention is paid to representation of middle atmosphere processes in climate model development.", "title": "GISS Model E2.2: A Climate Model Optimized for the Middle Atmosphere\u2014Model Structure, Climatology, Variability, and Climate Sensitivity"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRB..12518644S", "abstract": "We present the first application of full-waveform ambient noise inversion to observed correlation functions that jointly constrains 3-D Earth structure and heterogeneous noise sources. For this, we model and interpret ambient noise correlations as recordings of correlation wavefields, which completely eliminates the limiting assumptions of Greens function retrieval, such as equipartitioning and homogeneous random noise sources. Our method accounts for seismic wave propagation physics in 3-D heterogeneous and attenuating media and also for the heterogeneous and nonstationary nature of the ambient noise field. Designed as a proof of concept, the study considers long periods from 100 to 300 s, thus focusing on the Earths hum. Treating correlations as self-consistent observables allows us to make separate measurements on the causal and acausal branches of correlation functions, without any need to choose one of them or form the average. We validate our approach by assessing the quality of the obtained models and by comparing them to previous studies. This work is a step toward the establishment of full-waveform ambient noise inversion as a tomographic technique with the goal to go beyond ambient noise tomography based on Greens function retrieval.", "title": "Global-Scale Full-Waveform Ambient Noise Inversion"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526838F", "abstract": "Mars regional and global dust storms are able to impact the lower/upper atmospheres through dust aerosol radiative heating and cooling and atmospheric circulation. Here we present the first attempt to globally investigate how the dust impact transfers from the neutral upper atmosphere to the ionosphere and the induced magnetosphere above 100-km altitude. This is achieved by running a multifluid magnetohydrodynamic model under nondusty and dusty atmospheric conditions for the 2017 late-winter regional storm and the 1971-1972 global storm. Our results show that the dayside main ionospheric layer below \u223c250-km altitude undergoes an overall upwelling, where photochemical reactions dominate. The peak electron density remains unchanged, and the peak altitude shift is in accordance with the upper atmospheric expansion \u223c5 and \u223c15 km for the regional and global storms, respectively. Controlled by the day-to-night transport, the nightside ionosphere responds to the dust storms in a close connection with what happens on the dayside but not apparently with the ambient atmospheric change. At higher altitudes, dust-induced perturbations propagate upward from the ionosphere to the magnetosphere and extend from the dayside to the nightside, within a broad region bounded by the induced magnetospheric boundary. It is found that the global dust storm is able to dramatically enhance the CO<SUP>2+</SUP> loss by a factor of \u223c3, which amounts to an increase of \u223c20% or more for total carbon loss in the forms of neutrals and ions. Strong dust storms are a potentially important factor in atmospheric evolution at Mars.", "title": "Mars Dust Storm Effects in the Ionosphere and Magnetosphere and Implications for Atmospheric Carbon Loss"}, {"bibcode": "2020JGRA..12526838F", "abstract": "Mars regional and global dust storms are able to impact the lower/upper atmospheres through dust aerosol radiative heating and cooling and atmospheric circulation. Here we present the first attempt to globally investigate how the dust impact transfers from the neutral upper atmosphere to the ionosphere and the induced magnetosphere above 100-km altitude. This is achieved by running a multifluid magnetohydrodynamic model under nondusty and dusty atmospheric conditions for the 2017 late-winter regional storm and the 1971-1972 global storm. Our results show that the dayside main ionospheric layer below \u223c250-km altitude undergoes an overall upwelling, where photochemical reactions dominate. The peak electron density remains unchanged, and the peak altitude shift is in accordance with the upper atmospheric expansion \u223c5 and \u223c15 km for the regional and global storms, respectively. Controlled by the day-to-night transport, the nightside ionosphere responds to the dust storms in a close connection with what happens on the dayside but not apparently with the ambient atmospheric change. At higher altitudes, dust-induced perturbations propagate upward from the ionosphere to the magnetosphere and extend from the dayside to the nightside, within a broad region bounded by the induced magnetospheric boundary. It is found that the global dust storm is able to dramatically enhance the CO<SUP>2+</SUP> loss by a factor of \u223c3, which amounts to an increase of \u223c20% or more for total carbon loss in the forms of neutrals and ions. Strong dust storms are a potentially important factor in atmospheric evolution at Mars.", "title": "Mars Dust Storm Effects in the Ionosphere and Magnetosphere and Implications for Atmospheric Carbon Loss"}